SENTINEL

			ONE NATION

			BEN CARSON, MD, raised by a poor single mother in Detroit, recently retired as the director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital after a groundbreaking medical career of more than thirty-five years. Now a Washington Times columnist, he is the author of five previous books, including the New York Times bestsellers Gifted Hands, America the Beautiful, and most recently, One Nation, coauthored with his wife, CANDY CARSON. A former member of the President’s Council on Bioethics, he is the recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor in the country. Dr. and Mrs. Carson together founded the Carson Scholars Fund, dedicated to recognizing the academic achievements of deserving young people. They have three grown children and two grandchildren and now live in West Palm Beach, Florida.





		 			 			SENTINEL

			An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC

			375 Hudson Street

			New York, New York 10014

			penguin.com

			First published in the United States of America by Sentinel 2014

			This paperback edition with a new preface published 2015

			Copyright © 2014 by American Business Collaborative, LLC

			Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.

			Scripture quotations are taken from the Holy Bible, New Living Translation, copyright ©1996, 2004, 2007 by Tyndale House Foundation. Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.

			eISBN 978-0-698-15307-3

			Designed by Alissa Rose Theodor

			Cover photograph: Deborah Feingold

			Cover design: Dan Donohue




Version_3





Dedicated to the millions of Americans who fought, sacrificed, and died to provide freedom and prosperity for us and our progeny.





		 			CONTENTS





			ABOUT THE AUTHOR

			TITLE PAGE

			COPYRIGHT

			DEDICATION

			PREFACE

			INTRODUCTION:

THE 2013 NATIONAL PRAYER BREAKFAST

			1

			SAVING OUR FUTURE

			PART ONE

			CAUSES OF DISUNITY AND DECLINE

			2

			POLITICAL CORRECTNESS

			3

			ELITISM

			4

			IGNORANCE AND FORGETFULNESS

			5

			BIGOTRY

			6

			NO WINNERS IN POLITICAL FIGHTING

			7

			ENSLAVING OUR CHILDREN—

DON’T SELL THE FUTURE

			PART TWO

			SOLUTIONS

			8

			PUSHING BACK

			9

			RESPECTFUL DISAGREEMENT

			10

			THE ART OF COMPROMISE

			11

			BECOMING INFORMED

			12

			WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE

			13

			MY BROTHER’S KEEPER

			PART THREE

			WHO WE ARE

			14

			WITHOUT A VISION

			15

			ROLE MODELS

			16

			THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY

			17

			TAKE COURAGE

			EPILOGUE

			ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

			INDEX





		 			PREFACE




I wrote One Nation to address what each citizen of our great country can do to save America’s future. In early 2015, I delivered an address expanding on the themes of my book and touching on issues of national security that I had not included in it. I hope that the following words, taken from that important speech, awaken you to the dire state of our nation and encourage you to read on.

			—Ben Carson, May 2015

			It seems like every year we’re getting closer and closer to some very critical moments for our country. It also seems that we’re moving closer to a real crisis in our national leadership, and just thinking about the failures of the Obama administration is depressing. I think that’s why liberals are ready for Hillary, and I think that’s why the Left loves to re-label and rename things these days. For instance, if you’re pro-life, then you’re antiwoman. If you’re pro–traditional family, then you’re a homophobe. If you’re white and you oppose a progressive black person, you’re a racist. If you’re black and you oppose a progressive agenda, you’re crazy. And if you’re black and you oppose a progressive agenda and are pro-life and pro-family, they don’t even know what to call you. I mean, you end up on some watchlist for extremists.

			The real extremists are not sensible citizens looking out for their country. The real extremists are literally looking to destroy our country, and our current leadership is ignoring the threat. Our commander in chief and his staff must recognize the threat of militant Islamic terrorism. And let’s not get distracted by assuming that the threat is just from ISIS or other organizations that are not connected with any state governments, such as Al Qaeda and Boko Haram. We need to recognize that the Shia leadership of Iran is every bit as dangerous—and perhaps more dangerous—to the world as ISIS, Al Qaeda, or Boko Haram. We cannot take our eye off the ball as Iran continues to develop nuclear weapons. I’m not ready for us to ignore Benjamin Netanyahu while Iran works to develop the Bomb.

			What am I ready for? I’m not ready for Hillary, but I am ready for a country that puts our Constitution first—every part of it. And for those who have any doubts, that includes the Second Amendment. I’m ready for a country where we pay our way as we go, and we stop creating huge amounts of debt for future generations to have to pay off. I’m ready for a country where we take the restraints off the most dynamic economy the world has ever known and allow that economic engine to actually work for us. I’m ready for a country where we develop our natural energy resources. We have been blessed with them; let’s not make that a curse. It doesn’t mean we can’t look for alternatives and take care of the environment. Some people think it’s one or the other, but it’s not. That’s why God gave us our amazing brains—so we can do more than one thing at one time.

			I’m ready to see leadership on the world stage, not just politicians sitting around and waiting to see what other people do and then reacting to it. I’m ready for leadership in our nation that acts and doesn’t only react. I’m ready for school choice. We need to recognize that education is the great liberator in our country—no one needs to be a victim. I’m ready for putting healthcare in our hands and not in the hands of some bureaucrat. I’m ready for a balanced budget and for a fair taxation system that allows us to get rid of the IRS. I’m ready for a strong military and for taking care of our veterans the way they should be cared for. I’m ready for honesty and integrity and common sense and courage, because courage is what we really need. Freedom is not free—we must fight for it. We live in the land of the free and the home of the brave, but we cannot be free if we’re not brave. And being brave is something we ALL can do to help save America’s future!





		 			INTRODUCTION





THE 2013 NATIONAL PRAYER BREAKFAST




I was totally shocked when in the fall of 2012 my office received a call inquiring whether I would be willing to give the keynote address for the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast. I had already had the pleasure and honor of being the keynote speaker for the 1997 National Prayer Breakfast when President Clinton was in office. That speech was well received, even by President Clinton, despite my pointed comments about integrity in public office. “I just want to know who is responsible for putting this guy on before me,” he quipped when he came to the podium after my talk. The audience roared with laughter and he went on to give his usual very good speech. The event had gone as well as it could have, but I didn’t give a second thought as to whether I’d be asked again.

			Stunned by the request, I asked if anyone had ever done it twice and I was informed that only one person fit into that category and that was Billy Graham. I prayed about it and felt that there was a reason why I was being asked for a repeat performance. I talked by telephone and in person with members of the National Prayer Breakfast staff and they informed me that many senators thought that I was the right person not only to encourage people but also to help bring a sense of unity back to our nation’s capital. I was honored to accept the challenge and immediately begin praying for the necessary wisdom and words to gently address the spiritual, financial, and moral decline of America, a difficult task in the highly partisan atmosphere that exists in Washington, DC, today.

			The event organizers were obviously familiar with many of my public speeches in which I had taken no prisoners. I call it as I see it without dancing around a topic in order to spare everyone’s feelings. They were therefore somewhat concerned that I might say something that would offend the president. I indicated that I had no intention of offending anyone, the president included. Nevertheless, the organizers were still quite interested in receiving a copy of my transcript just to be on the safe side. I informed them that the 1997 National Prayer Breakfast committee had also wanted a copy of my notes but because I don’t speak from a transcript, I wasn’t able to provide them with a copy at that time either.

			The breakfast was held at the Washington Hilton in the District of Columbia. The predictable protocols were shared by security and the Secret Service the evening before the event. And in the morning, I had the opportunity to chat with other participants in the Green Room over breakfast appetizers. I recalled that the menu in 1997 was considerably more varied and robust, and thinking that the fact that the selections were meager was a good thing since the federal budget is under a lot of pressure. I also remember the affability of the president and first lady in the 1997 receiving line. They were both very gracious and easy to talk to. This year, President and Mrs. Obama were not present in the Green Room, so there really was no opportunity to meet them or chat beforehand. However, there were many well-known dignitaries in the platform party there. Once we were on stage, I was seated on one side of the podium between Vice President Biden and Senator Schumer of New York, while the president was seated on the other side of the lectern between his wife and Senator Sessions of Alabama.

			Before my speech, Bible readings and inspirational comments were made by a variety of people. I was introduced, followed by very generous applause, and began my speech by reading several Bible verses that seemed particularly applicable to the leadership in Washington, DC, today. The text of the speech follows:


Thank you so much. Mr. President, Mr. Vice President, Mrs. Obama, and distinguished guests . . . which includes everybody. Thank you so much for this wonderful honor to be at this stage again. I was here 16 years ago, and the fact that they invited me back means that I didn’t offend too many people, so that was great.

			I want to start by reading four texts which will put into context what I’m going to say.

			Proverbs 11:9: Evil words destroy one’s friends; wise discernment rescues the godly.

			Proverbs 11:12: It is foolish to belittle a neighbor; a person with good sense remains silent.

			Proverbs 11:25: The generous prosper and are satisfied; those who refresh others will themselves be refreshed.

			2 Chronicles 7:14: Then if my people who are called by my name will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sins and heal their land.

			You know, I have an opportunity to speak in a lot of venues. This is my fourth speech this week. And I have an opportunity to talk to a lot of people. And I’ve been asking people what concerns you? What are you most concerned about in terms of the spirituality and the direction of our nation and our world? I’ve talked to very prominent Democrats . . . very prominent Republicans. And I was surprised by the uniformity of their answers. And those (answers) have informed my comments this morning.

			Now, it’s not my intention to offend anyone. I have discovered, however, in recent years that it’s very difficult to speak to a large group of people these days and not offend someone. People walk around with their feelings on their shoulders waiting for you to say something. “Ah, did you hear that?” and they can’t hear anything else you say. The PC police are out in force at all times. I remember once I was talking to a group about the difference between a human brain and a dog’s brain, and a man got offended. He said, “You can’t talk about dogs like that!” People just focus in on that . . . completely miss the point of what you’re saying. And we’ve reached the point where people are afraid to actually talk about what they want to say because somebody might be offended. People are afraid to say “Merry Christmas” at Christmastime. Doesn’t matter whether the person you’re talking to is Jewish or, you know, whether they’re any religion. That’s a salutation, a greeting of goodwill. We’ve got to get over this sensitivity. You know it keeps people from saying what they really believe.

			You know, I’m reminded of a very successful young businessman. And he loved to buy his mother these exotic gifts for Mother’s Day. [One year] he ran out of ideas, and then he ran across these birds. These birds were cool, you know? They cost $5,000 apiece. They could dance, they could sing, they could talk! He was so excited, he bought two of them. Sent them to his mother, couldn’t wait to call her up on Mother’s Day, “Mother, Mother, what’d you think of those birds?” And she said, “They was good.” [laughter] He said, “No, no, no! Mother, you didn’t eat those birds? Those birds cost $5,000 apiece! They could dance, they could sing, they could talk!” And she said, “Well, they should have said something.” [laughter] And, you know, that’s where we’ll end up, too, if we don’t speak up for what we believe. [laughter] And, you know, what we need to do—[applause]what we need to do in this PC world is forget about unanimity of speech and unanimity of thought, and we need to concentrate on being respectful to those people with whom we disagree.

			And that’s when I think we begin to make real progress. And one last thing about political correctness, which I think is a horrible thing, by the way. I’m very, very compassionate, and I’m not ever out to offend anyone. But PC is dangerous. Because you see, in this country, one of the founding principles was freedom of thought and freedom of expression. And it muffles people. It puts a muzzle on them. And at the same time, keeps people from discussing important issues while the fabric of this society is being changed. And we cannot fall for that trick. And what we need to do is start talking about things . . . talking about things that are important. Things that were important in the development of our nation.

			One of those things was education. I’m very passionate about education because it made such a big difference in my life. But here we are at a time in the world—the information age, the age of technology—and yet 30% of people who enter high school in this country do not graduate. 44% of people who start a four-year college program do not finish it in four years. What is that about? Think back to a darker time in our history. Two hundred years ago when slavery was going on it was illegal to educate a slave, particularly to teach them to read. Why do you think that was? Because when you educate a man, you liberate a man. And there I was as a youngster placing myself in the same situation that a horrible institution did because I wasn’t taking advantage of the education. I was a horrible student. Most of my classmates thought I was the stupidest person in the world. They called me “Dummy.” I was the butt of all the jokes.

			Now, admittedly, it was a bad environment. Single-parent home . . . you know my mother and father had gotten divorced early on. My mother got married when she was 13. She was one of 24 children. Had a horrible life. Discovered that her husband was a bigamist, had another family. And she only had a third-grade education. She had to take care of us. Dire poverty. I had a horrible temper and poor self-esteem. All the things that you think would preclude success. But I had something very important. I had a mother who believed in me. And I had a mother who would never allow herself to be a victim no matter what happened . . . never made excuses, and she never accepted an excuse from us. And if we ever came up with an excuse, she always said, “Do you have a brain?” And if the answer was yes, then she said, “Then you could have thought your way out of it.” It doesn’t matter what John or Susan or Mary or anybody else did or said. And it was the most important thing she did for my brother and myself. Because if you don’t accept excuses, pretty soon people stop giving them, and they start looking for solutions. And that is a critical issue when it comes to success.

			Well, you know, we did live in dire poverty. And one of the things that I hated was poverty. You know, some people hate spiders, some people hate snakes . . . I hated poverty. I couldn’t stand it. [laughter] But, you know, my mother couldn’t stand the fact that we were doing poorly in school. And she prayed and she asked God to give her wisdom . . . what could she do to get her young sons to understand the importance of developing their minds, so that they could control their own lives? And you know what, God gave her the wisdom . . . at least in her opinion. My brother and I didn’t think it was that wise. Because it was to turn off the TV, let us watch only two or three TV programs during the week, and with all that spare time read two books apiece from the Detroit Public Libraries and submit to her written book reports which she couldn’t read, but we didn’t know that. She’d put check marks and highlights and stuff—but, you know I just hated this. And my friends were out having a good time. Her friends would criticize her. They would say, “You can’t make boys stay in the house reading books, they’ll grow up and they’ll hate you.” And I would overhear them and say, “Mother, you know they’re right.” But she didn’t care, you know.

			But, after a while, I actually began to enjoy reading those books, because we were very poor. But between the covers of those books I could go anywhere, I could be anybody, I could do anything. I began to read about people of great accomplishment. And as I read those stories, I began to see a connecting thread. I began to see that the person who has the most to do with you and what happens to you in life, is you. You make decisions. You decide how much energy you want to put behind that decision. And I came to understand that I had control of my own destiny. And at that point I didn’t hate poverty anymore, because I knew it was only temporary. I knew I could change that. It was incredibly liberating for me, made all the difference.

			To continue on that theme of education, in 1831 Alexis de Tocqueville came to America to study this country. The Europeans were fascinated. How could a fledgling nation, barely 50 years old already be competing with them on virtually every level? This was impossible. De Tocqueville was going to sort it out. He looked at our government and he was duly impressed by the three branches of government—four now because now we have special interest groups, but it was only three back in those days. He said, “WOW, this is really something,” and then he said, “but let me look at their educational system,” and he was blown away. You see, anybody who had finished the second grade was completely literate. He could find a mountain man on the outskirts of society who could read the newspaper and could have a political discussion . . . could tell him how the government worked.

			If you really want to be impressed, take a look at the chapter on education in my latest book, America the Beautiful, which I wrote with my wife—it came out last year, and in that education chapter you will see questions extracted from a sixth-grade exit exam from the 1800s—a test you had to pass to get your sixth-grade certificate. I doubt most college graduates today could pass that test. We have dumbed things down to that level. And the reason that is so dangerous is because the people who founded this nation said that our system of government was designed for a well-informed and educated populace. And when they become less informed, they become vulnerable. Think about that . . . our system of government. That is why education is so vitally important.

			Now some people say, “Ahhh, you’re overblowing it, things aren’t that bad, and you’re a doctor, a neurosurgeon. Why are you concerned about these things?” Got news for you. FIVE doctors signed the Declaration of Independence. Doctors were involved in the framing of the Constitution, the Bill of Rights . . . a whole bunch of things. It’s only been in recent decades that we’ve extracted ourselves, which I think is a big mistake.

			We need doctors, we need scientists, engineers. We need all those people involved in government, not just lawyers. I don’t have anything against lawyers, but you know, here’s the thing about lawyers . . . I’m sorry, but I got to be truthful . . . got to be truthful—what do lawyers learn in law school? To win . . . by hook or by crook . . . you’ve got to win. So you got all these Democrat lawyers, and you got all these Republican lawyers and their sides want to win. We need to get rid of that. What we need to start thinking about is, how do we solve problems?

			Now, before I get shot, let me finish. I don’t like to bring up problems without coming up with solutions. My wife and I started the Carson Scholars Fund 16 years ago after we heard about an international survey looking at the ability of eighth graders in 22 countries to solve math and science problems, and we came out number 21 out of 22. We only barely beat out number 22 . . . very concerning.

			We’d go to these schools and we’d see all these trophies: All-State Basketball, All-State Wrestling, All-State this, that, and the other. The quarterback was the big man on campus. What about the intellectual superstar? What did they get? A National Honor Society pin? A pat on the head, “There, there little nerd?” Nobody cared about them. And is it any wonder that sometimes the smart kids try to hide? They don’t want anybody to know that they are smart? This is not helping us as a nation. So we started giving out scholarships from all backgrounds for superior academic performance and demonstration of humanitarian qualities. Unless you cared about other people, it didn’t matter how smart you were. We’ve got plenty of people like that. We don’t need those. We need smart people who care about other people.

			We would give them money. The money would go into a trust. They would get interest on it. When they would go to college they would get the money. But also the school gets a trophy, every bit as impressive as any sports trophy—and it goes right out there with the others. They get a medal. They get to go to a banquet. We try to put them on the same kind of pedestal as we do the all-state athletes. Now I have nothing against athletics or entertainment, please believe me. I’m from Baltimore. The Ravens won. This is great—okay. But—but what will maintain our position in the world? The ability to shoot a 25-foot jump shot or the ability to solve a quadratic equation? We need to put the things into proper perspective.

			Many teachers have told us that when we put a Carson Scholar in their classroom, the GPA of the whole class goes up over the next year. It’s been very gratifying. We started 16 years ago with 25 scholarships in Maryland, now we’ve given out more than 5,000 and we are in all 50 states. But we’ve also put in reading rooms. These are fascinating places that no little kid could possibly pass up. And uh, they get points for the amount of time they spend in there reading, and the number of books they read. They can trade the points for prizes. In the beginning they do it for the prizes, but it doesn’t take long before their academic performance begins to improve.

			And we particularly target Title I schools where the kids come from homes with no books and they go to schools with no libraries. Those are the ones who drop out. We need to truncate that process early on because we can’t afford to waste any of those young people. You know, for every one of those people that we keep from going down that path, that path of self-destruction and mediocrity, that’s one less person you have to protect yourself and your family from. One less person you have to pay for in the penal or the welfare system. One more taxpaying productive member of society who may invent a new energy source or come up with a cure for cancer. They are all important to us and we need every single one of them. It makes a difference. And when you go home tonight, read about it, Carson Scholars Fund, carson scholars.org.

			But why is it so important that we educate our people? Because we don’t want to go down the same pathway as many other pinnacle nations that have preceded us. I think particularly about ancient Rome. Very powerful. Nobody could even challenge them militarily. But what happened to them? They destroyed themselves from within . . . moral decay, fiscal irresponsibility . . . they destroyed themselves. If you don’t think that can happen to America, you get out your books and you start reading.

			But you know, we can fix it. Why can we fix it? Because we’re smart. We have some of the most intellectually gifted people leading our nation. All we need to do is remember what our real responsibilities are so that we can solve the problems.

			I think about these problems all the time. And you know, my role model was Jesus. And He used parables to help people understand things. And one of our big problems right now (and like I said, I’m not politically correct, so I’m sorry), but you know—our deficit is a big problem. Think about it. And our national debt—$16 and 1/2 trillion dollars—you think that’s not a lot of money? I’ll tell you what! Count one number per second, which you can’t even do because once you get to a thousand it will take you longer than a second, but . . . one number per second. You know how long it would take you to count to 16 trillion? 507,000 years—more than a half a million years to get there. We have to deal with this.

			Here’s the parable: A family falls on hard times. Dad loses his job or is demoted . . . gets part-time work. He has 5 children. He comes to the 5 children, he says, “We’re going to have to reduce your allowance.” Well, they’re not happy about it but . . . he says, “. . . except for John and Susan. They’re . . . they’re special. They get to keep their allowance. In fact, we’ll give them more.” How do you think that’s going to go down? Not too well. Same thing happens. Enough said.

			What about our taxation system? So complex there is no one who can possibly comply with every jot and tittle of our tax system. If I wanted to get you, I could get you on a tax issue. That doesn’t make any sense. What we need to do is come up with something that is simple.

			And when I pick up my Bible, you know what I see? I see the fairest individual in the Universe: God. And He’s given us a system. It’s called tithe. Now we don’t necessarily have to pay 10% but it’s the principle. He didn’t say, “If your crops fail, don’t give me any tithes.” He didn’t say, “If you have a bumper crop, give me triple tithes.” So there must be something inherently fair about proportionality. You make $10 billion dollars you put in a billion. You make $10 you put in $1. Of course, you’ve got to get rid of the loopholes. But now some people say, “Well that’s not fair because it doesn’t hurt the guy who made $10 billion dollars as much as the guy who made $10.” Where does it say you have to hurt the guy? He’s just put a billion dollars in the pot. We don’t need to hurt him.

			It’s that kind of thinking . . . it’s that kind of thinking that has resulted in 602 banks in the Cayman Islands. That money needs to be back here, building our infrastructure and creating jobs. And we’re smart enough . . . we’re smart enough to figure out how to do that.

			We’ve already started down the path to solving one of the other big problems: health care. We need to have good health care for everybody. It’s the most important thing that a person can have. Money means nothing, titles mean nothing when you don’t have your health. But we’ve got to figure out efficient ways to do it. We spend a lot of money on health care, twice as much per capita as anybody else in the world, and yet not very efficient. What can we do?

			Here’s my solution. When a person is born, give him a birth certificate, an electronic medical record, and a health savings account [HSA], to which money can be contributed, pretax from the time you are born, to the time you die. When you die, you can pass it on to your family members so that when you’re 85 years old and you’ve got 6 diseases, you’re not trying to spend up everything. You’re happy to pass it on and there’s nobody talking about death panels. That’s number one.

			Also, for the people who are indigent, who don’t have any money, we can make contributions to their HSA each month because we already have this huge pot of money. Instead of sending it to some bureaucracy, let’s put it into HSAs. Now they have some control over their own health care and what do you think they’re going to do? They’re going to learn very quickly how to be responsible. When Mr. Jones gets that diabetic foot ulcer, he’s not going to the emergency room and blowing a big chunk of it. He’s going to go to the clinic. He learns that very quickly . . . gets the same treatment. In the emergency room they send him out. In the clinic they say, now let’s get your diabetes under control so that you’re not back here in three weeks with another problem. That’s how we begin to solve these kinds of problems. It’s much more complex than that, and I don’t have time to go into it all, but we CAN do all of these things because we are smart people.

			And let me begin to close here by another parable: Sea Captain. And he’s out on the sea near the area where the Titanic went down. And they look ahead and there’s a bright light right there . . . another ship, he figures. He tells his signaler, “Signal that ship: Deviate 10 degrees to the south.” Back comes the message, “No, you deviate 10 degrees to the north.” Well, he’s a little bit incensed, you know. He says, “Send a message, ‘This is CAPTAIN Johnson. Deviate 10 degrees to the south.’” Back comes the message, “This is Ensign 4th Class Reilly. Deviate 10 degrees to the north.” Now Captain Johnson is really upset. He says, “Send him a message, ‘This is a naval destroyer.’” Back comes the message, “This is a lighthouse.” Enough said.

			Now, what about the symbol of our nation? The eagle. The bald eagle. It’s an interesting story how we chose that, but a lot of people think we call it the bald eagle because it looks like it has a bald head. That’s not the reason. It comes from the Old English word piebald, which means crowned with white. And we just shortened it to bald. Now, use that the next time you see somebody who thinks they know everything. You’ll get ’em on that one.

			But, why is that eagle able to fly . . . high . . . forward? Because it has two wings: a left wing and a right wing. Enough said.

			And I want to close with this story: Two hundred years ago this nation was involved in a war, the War of 1812. The British, who are now our good friends, thought that we were young whippersnappers. It was time for us to become a colony again. They were winning that war . . . marching up the eastern seaboard, destroying city after city. Destroyed Washington, DC, burned down the White House. Next stop . . . Baltimore. As they came into the Chesapeake Bay, that armada of ships . . . war ships as far as the eye could see. It was looking grim. Fort McHenry standing right there. General Armistead, who was in charge of Fort McHenry, had a large American flag commissioned to fly in front of the fort. The admiral in charge of the British fleet was offended, and said “Take that flag down. You have until dusk to take that flag down. If you don’t take it down, we will reduce you to ashes.”

			There was a young amateur poet on board by the name of Francis Scott Key, sent by President Madison to try to obtain the release of an American physician who was being held captive. He overheard the British plans. They were not going to let him off the ship. He mourned. As dusk approached he mourned for his fledgling young nation, and as the sun fell, the bombardment started. Bombs bursting in air . . . missiles . . . so much debris. He strained, trying to see, was the flag still there? Couldn’t see a thing. All night long it continued. At the crack of dawn he ran out to the banister. He looked, straining his eyes, but all he could see was dust and debris.

			And then there was a clearing and he beheld the most beautiful sight he had ever seen . . . the torn and tattered Stars and Stripes still waving. And many historians say that was the turning point in the War of 1812. We went on to win that war and to retain our freedom. And if you had gone onto the grounds of Fort McHenry that day, you would have seen at the base of that flag, the bodies . . . of soldiers who took turns propping up that flag! They would not let that flag go down because they believed in what that flag symbolized. And what did it symbolize? One nation, under God, [applause] indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Thank you. God Bless.

			Many have commented that the president appeared to be uncomfortable during my speech, but I was not paying particular attention to him or his reactions, as my comments were really directed more at the American people than the people on the dais. At the conclusion of the program, the president approached me to shake my hand and thank me for my participation. He did not appear to be hostile or angry, but within a matter of minutes after the conclusion of the program, I received a call from some of the prayer breakfast organizers saying that the White House was upset and requesting that I call the president and apologize for offending him. I said that I did not think that he was offended and that I didn’t think that such a call was warranted.

			Although I thought the speech was good—the audience response was overwhelming, I had no idea that it would go viral and that literally millions of people would be talking about it over the next few days. This reaction was a reflection of the fact that the American people are excited to know that they are not the only ones who value common sense. People are also excited when they see one of their fellow citizens unintimidated by political correctness and unafraid to express his opinions.

			The conservative news outlets were very excited about the talk and in fact the Wall Street Journal penned an article entitled, “Ben Carson for President.” Requests for my appearance on television and radio exploded and there was and continues to be much speculation about my political future. Over the years, there have been many attempts to get me to throw my hat into the political arena. I have been offered support from around the country and tremendous financial resources if I decide to run for national office. But I have not felt called to run. I suspect that there are many others who think logically and are interested in a political future who might be better candidates than myself. Nevertheless, if I felt called by God to officially enter the world of politics, I certainly would not hesitate to do so.

			However, at the moment, I believe the more important thing that can be done with the platform I have been given is to try to convince the American populace that we are not one another’s enemies even if a (D) is by some of our names and an (R) by the names of others. Knowing that the future of my grandchildren and everyone else’s is put in jeopardy by a continuation of reckless spending, godless government, and mean-spirited attempts to silence critics leaves me with little choice but to continue to expound on the principles outlined in my prayer breakfast speech and to fight for a bright future for America.





SAVING OUR FUTURE



Godliness exalts a nation, but sin is a disgrace to any people.

			PROVERBS 14:34



Several years ago I took a trip to Alaska, and my hosts offered to send me on an excursion in their private plane to see the glaciers in the area. I was extremely excited and eagerly accepted the offer. I was less excited when I saw the single-engine prop plane that would be used by the pilot. He assured me that he had flown this mission many times and that the plane was very safe, so we headed out.

			As the plane took off, I marveled at the beautiful scenery. As we flew over the mountaintop and dropped into the valley, it almost seemed as if we were on another planet. The glaciers were awe inspiring and I quietly thanked God for the opportunity to view these natural wonders.

			As I was enjoying the sights, heavy cloud cover descended on the valley severely obscuring our view. The small plane was not equipped for instrument-only flight, so the pilot announced that we were going to climb through the clouds as rapidly as we could without going into a stall, and that we should clear the mountaintops that surrounded us. He spoke calmly, but I could detect the uncertainty in his voice. Deeply concerned, I entered into prayer and reminded myself that God is in charge even when we are in grave danger.

			After several intense minutes of upward flight, there was a break in the clouds and we cleared the mountain peaks by just a few feet. Relieved, I thanked the pilot for his quick and decisive action that saved our lives. I was never so happy to be on the ground as when we landed at the small airstrip.

			Our nation is in trouble today, and our only chance is to take quick and decisive action the way the pilot did in Alaska. Shrugging and hoping that something good would happen was not a viable choice for us as our plane hurtled toward the mountain, and it is not a wise choice for us today. Doing everything we could while beseeching the mercies of God paid big dividends in the Alaskan sky, and prayerful action could make all the difference in the problems America faces now.

			Many Americans argue that our nation’s future does not need to be saved and that we are in very good shape. They think that only partisans are skeptical about our future and that people say negative things in order to make the current administration look bad. They see the beautiful view that is America, but they don’t have the common sense and wisdom to look for the lowering clouds that obscure the mountains.

			It is true that we are enjoying the benefits of the system set up by our founders, and we are relatively quite comfortable because previous generations have made good choices. Nevertheless, the fog has been gathering for years, and we must act quickly and decisively to deal with substantial issues if we don’t want to destroy our children’s future.

			A quick glance at a newspaper should be enough to perceive the warning signs. As far as education is concerned, we have made a lot of progress in being politically correct, but very little progress in basic education, particularly in areas like math and science. The secular progressive movement completely denies any moral backsliding and feels that we have made substantial progress as a nation with respect to great moral issues like abortion, gay marriage, and helping the poor, but in reality we are losing our moral compass and are caught up in elitism and bigotry. On top of that, our national debt and the passage of Obamacare are threatening the financial future of our nation. Worst of all, we seem to have lost our ability to discuss important issues respectfully and courteously and cannot come together enough to begin to solve our problems.

			We each need to take an active role in changing the course of our nation if we are to live up to the motto “one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.” We are the pinnacle nation in the world right now, but if the examples of Egypt, Greece, Rome, and Great Britain teach us anything, it is that pinnacle nations are not guaranteed their place forever. If we fail to rediscover the basic principles of common sense, manners, and morality, we will go the same way they did. Fortunately, our downward pathway is not an inexorable one. It is not too late to learn from the mistakes of those who preceded us and take the kinds of corrective action that will ensure a promising future for those who come after us.

			Communities, political parties, business organizations, the news media, educational institutions, and the government can all work to turn our nation around, but the most important changes will be made by you and me, the American individuals. Each of us can control only our own behavior, but if we all take action individually, our actions will collectively have a significant impact on the direction of our nation. As individuals, we can educate ourselves and our children, cultivate the art of compromise, pray for wisdom, and hold our representatives accountable. Each of us can positively affect our nation just by making ourselves (and those in our spheres of influence ) aware of the fact that we are being used as pawns by those who try to tell us what we should think as opposed to using our own common sense.

			As an example of cloudy thinking that threatens common sense, consider the recent furor over voter ID cards. I travel to many nations of the world, and recently I’ve taken it upon myself to ask citizens of those other countries how they prevent voter fraud. I have yet to find a nation that does not require some type of official voter identification card or mechanism to ensure that the voter is who they say they are. This is basic common sense, yet some members of our society who have co-opted the media have convinced ordinary Americans that there is some type of discrimination going on when we require the same thing of those voting in our country. This would not even be an issue if political groups weren’t trying to curry favor with certain groups of voters. Instead of being whipped into a frenzy over a nonissue, it is my hope and prayer that individual Americans will educate themselves on this issue, seek to understand one another’s values, allow common sense to prevail, and reject those who try to politicize almost everything to their own advantage.

			When I was a child, there was a common saying: “Sticks and stones may break my bones but names will never hurt me.” I’m not sure that children today have ever heard that expression and certainly the adults don’t seem to know it any longer. Special interest groups tell our country’s citizens that they should be easily offended by simple words or suggestions. By taking umbrage so readily, people shift the discussion from the subject matter to the person making the comment, which is a desirable thing to do only if you don’t have a good argument. This is also a good way to keep people at one another’s throats constantly so they can’t form a united front and deal logically with the many real issues facing the nation. Individually, Americans need to choose to be the bigger person, overlook offense, and be willing to have candid discussions about volatile issues.

			There have been many stories recently about the bullying epidemic that seems to be occurring in our public school system. We should not be terribly surprised by this because children emulate what they see adults doing. One does not have to look at television for very long or listen to the radio for an extended period before one sees supposedly rational and mature adults vehemently attacking one another, calling each other names and acting like third graders. I have grown used to dealing with people who resort to name-calling at the drop of a hat by saying, “Now that you have had an opportunity to engage in a gratuitous attack, is it possible for us to return to the subject matter at hand?” I refuse to engage in the grade-schoolyard tactics of name-calling and mean-spirited comments when we have so many important issues to solve. We can help our nation quite a bit if we refrain from getting into our respective corners and throwing hand grenades at each other, and instead try to understand the other’s viewpoint, reject the stifling of political correctness, and engage in intelligent civil discussion.

			A suitably thick skin, common sense, and manners are of limited use without education. I’m always fascinated by some of the “man on the street” episodes on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno or Watters’ World on Fox, where Jay or Jesse asks people for very basic information regarding the significance of a particular day or some historical event and many of them have no clue about the right answer. Our nation’s founders felt very strongly that our system of government could only survive with a well-informed and educated populace. They understood that if the populace reached the point of not being able to critically analyze information, it would easily fall prey to slick politicians and unethical news media. All citizens need to arm themselves with a basic knowledge of American history and stay abreast of current events, analyzing them with respect to history. Knowledge is power and at a time when the people are becoming increasingly impotent while the government grows larger and more powerful, it is vital that we arm ourselves with knowledge.

			Finally, each of us must have courage. I have encountered countless thousands of Americans, as I’ve traveled around the country recently giving speeches, who resonate very strongly with the concepts that I’m putting forward but who have been beaten down. They have mistaken the false unity of political correctness and submission for the true unity that comes with liberty, justice, and responsibility. This unity doesn’t succeed without some conflict, but it is far healthier than silence and is worth the fight. I’ve been spreading the word that we must have enough backbone to stand up to the secular progressives who insist on fundamentally changing America into something that we would not recognize as our hard-won government of, by, and for the people. Because there are consequences for standing up for your beliefs in the current distorted version of America, one has to be very courageous when standing up to malicious influences or even while engaging in healthy dialogue with our neighbors about important issues.

			The bottom line is that our country is in the process of undergoing fundamental radical changes while rapidly moving away from the “can-do” attitude that made us the most prosperous and beneficent superpower the world has ever known. If each of us sits back and expects someone to take action, it will soon be too late. But as of today, it is still not too late to join the battle to save our nation and pass on to our children and grandchildren something we can all be proud of.





POLITICAL CORRECTNESS



Those who love to talk will experience the consequences, for the tongue can kill or nourish life.

			PROVERBS 18:21



When I was a teenager, my neighbor had a dog that appeared to be quite vicious. If anyone walked near that home, the dog would come running toward the fence, barking and snarling, sending the passerby rapidly along his way. His ferociousness actually changed the behavior of people in the neighborhood, who began to avoid walking down the alley when the dog was outside.

			Feeling that the dog should not be ruining the neighborhood, I began reading books about dogs and their behavior to see what I could do. I discovered that dogs tend to react to the reaction of the human or other animal it is trying to frighten—if the person they bark at shows fear, the dog decides its antics are effective. If the person shows no fear, the dog will give up.

			It took a lot of courage, but I decided to repeatedly walk by the fence and completely ignore the dog. It took about a month before the dog realized that I would not react, but eventually he stopped trying to frighten me and would simply lie down quietly as I walked by.

			Today’s political correctness operates in the same way as that dog. Self-appointed political correctness police (PCP) have set up speech guidelines that go far beyond the requirements of kindness, good manners, education, and tact. They forbid the use of the word slavery by conservatives, the mention of Nazism by conservatives, or the mention of homosexuality in anything other than a positive context, to name a few of their rules. Going even further, they continually grow their list of terms they believe are offensive, tripping up innocent people with their increasingly strict speech code. By bludgeoning people who violate these rules, the PCP establishes a chilling control over the speech of a nation that was founded on the principles of freedom of speech. Intent on managing the national conversation, they mock and belittle anyone who violates their tenets of speech or behavior with such ferocity that few people will dare trespass their boundaries. For example, a few years ago, Lawrence Summers, then president of Harvard, mentioned that men and women might be wired differently. His comments drew a fierce attack from the PCP that may well have influenced his decision to resign his position.

			I had my own run-in with the PCP when I said that I thought Obamacare was the worst thing in our country since slavery. My point was that we the American people were turning over to the government control of our most precious resource—our health. The implications of such a shift of power (where we have no choice but to purchase the only prescribed product—Obamacare), are profound in a society that is supposed to be free and centered around freedom of choice. Once we give the government this kind of power, it is naïve to believe that they will stop here in their quest for total control of our lives. The PCP wanted to immediately divert the argument away from this fundamental truth, so they said I thought Obamacare was an evil equal to slavery, when I was merely pointing out that this particular attempt at health care reform takes us the first step away from liberty.

			Many well-meaning Americans have bought into the PC speech code, thinking that by being extra careful not to offend anyone we will achieve unity. What they fail to realize is that this is a false unity that prevents us from talking about important issues and is a Far Left strategy to paralyze us while they change our nation. People have been led to become so sensitive that fault can be found in almost anything anyone says because somewhere, somehow, someone will be offended by it.

			To stop this, Americans need to recognize what is happening, speak up courageously, avoid fearful or angry responses, and ignore the barking and snarling as we put political correctness to bed forever. This is the reason why I choose to continue speaking out despite the many efforts of the secular progressives to discredit and silence me. It is also the reason why I continue to encourage Americans to stand up for the freedoms that were hard-won and must be preserved if we are to remain a free society.





Political Correctness Stifles Dialogue


			Open discussions of political and social issues are key to healthy unity. Society works very much like a marriage in the sense that open communication facilitates harmony. In almost all marriages that end in divorce, there is a serious breakdown in communication, followed by false assumptions and outright warfare. One of the first things a marriage counselor does is get the warring parties to sit down and open up to each other. Two people may perceive the same event very differently, and gaining an understanding of the other person’s perspective can be the first step to healing a broken marriage. If fear or anger prevents either person from expressing his or her perspective, there is no hope for the relationship.

			In our country today, we act much like those warring spouses who want nothing more than to get rid of each other. Political correctness has thrown a veil of silence over our important discussions. Rather than asking those with whom we disagree to clearly state their case, we set up rules of political correctness that mandate that their perspective must be the same as ours. We then demonize those with whom we disagree and as a result fail to reach any consensus that might solve our problems.

			The only people who can resolve this problem are “we the people.” We do not have to yield to pop culture, Hollywood, politicians, and the media who are the primary enforcers of political correctness. We need to simply ignore the “barking” and act like mature adults who can tolerate hearing something about which we disagree and still remain civil and open-minded.





Who Benefits from Hypersensitivity?


			While most people buying into the PC code are well meaning and just want to get along with everyone, the ones who bark and snarl the most are those on the Far Left who cultivate political correctness in order to forward their own agendas. In his famous book, Rules for Radicals, Saul Alinsky, an activist and organizer of the Far Left, makes it clear that leftists trying to effect change are to have no conversations with their opponents, because open discussion could lend credence to their opponents’ arguments and humanize them in the sight of the public. He argued that activists must demonize their opponents and get the larger society to recognize the activists as the ones who will deliver society from the demons. As Alinsky suggests, cultivating hypersensitivity to perceived slights by conservatives is a convenient way to halt important conversations and to demonize opponents.

			Unfortunately, hypersensitivity is not limited to those on the Left. Conservative politicians have also adopted the strategy of feigned offense. The Right tends to be hypersensitive about blaming Bush for economic problems and the double standard of the media. Even though these problems are real, hypersensitive conservatives sometimes see bias where it doesn’t exist, defend Bush when they don’t need to, or even shut down a discussion because of a perceived slight.

			While we all have a tendency to say “See, they did it too!” in order to justify wrongdoing, we must start focusing on what is right or wrong and not on what someone else did. It is imperative that each of us, whatever side we are on, begins to act like adults who can find real solutions instead of pointing the finger at others or running away crying because someone disagreed with us.





It’s Not All About You


			When talking about hypersensitivity in our society, it is important to distinguish between those who are truly sensitive to comments and those instigators and manipulators with feigned sensitivity and outrage. To the first group I would say it’s time to grow up and start thinking about what you can do to contribute to society’s well-being instead of choosing to be a victim of speech that is sometimes intentionally cruel and at other times completely innocent. The best way not to be easily injured by others’ speech is to step out of the center of the circle so everything is not about you. By thinking about others and looking at things from other people’s perspectives, there is much less time to feel that someone is picking on you or your interests.

			In a previous book, I mentioned that when I was an intern at Johns Hopkins back in 1977, the sight of a black physician was decidedly rare. Often when I would go onto a hospital ward while wearing my surgical scrubs, a nurse would say, “I’m sorry, but Mr. Patient is not quite ready to be taken to the operating room yet,” assuming that I was an orderly. After many years of hard work to achieve the title of doctor, many might say that I would have been justified in reacting angrily to the suggestion that I was an orderly, especially given the racial overtones of the misunderstanding. However, I tried to look at things from the nurse’s perspective. The only black males she had seen come onto that ward wearing surgical scrubs were orderlies who were coming to pick up or deliver a patient. Why would she think differently in my case? A highly sensitive individual would have created a scene and everyone would have felt uncomfortable. I would simply say in those situations, “I’m sorry that Mr. Patient isn’t ready yet, but I’m Dr. Carson and I’m here for another reason.”

			The offending nurse would often be so embarrassed that I actually felt sorry for her or him and would say, “It’s quite all right and you don’t need to feel bad.” I would be very nice to that person, and I would have another friend for life. That was a whole lot better than having someone who would always feel ashamed, embarrassed, or hostile when they saw me.

			Some might say that by allowing ignorant slights or insults to go, I capitulated to the racism of the day, but that’s not the case. Instead, by realizing that the nurse’s statement really wasn’t a reflection of careful judgment about me, I was able to remain calm and gently correct the offender. I guarantee you that both the nurse’s mistake and my response reduced the lingering effects of racism in her mind just as well, if not better, than an angry outburst on my part would have.

			Political correctness aside, people do say ignorant, insensitive, and even malicious things. However, most of our public fights over racism, sexism, and every other “ism” could be easily resolved if the injured party expected the best of the offender and corrected the offensive statement in a kind and rational manner. We all have choices in the way we react to the words we hear. Our lives and the lives of all those around us will be significantly improved if we choose to react positively rather than negatively.





Faux Hypersensitivity


			To the second group of hypersensitives, those who are feigning hurt to make a point, I would say you need to decide where your priorities are. Are you interested in the unity and our nation’s well-being or is it more important for you to further a political agenda that is not consistent with the founding principles of unity in this country? Political correctness and hypersensitivity blocks discussion of important social issues while they are being changed—exactly the time when it is most important to discuss them.

			An excellent example of how these people work occurred about a month after the National Prayer Breakfast when on national television I was asked about my opinion regarding gay marriage. I immediately stated that I believe marriage is between a man and a woman and that no group has the right to change the definition of marriage to suit their needs. By way of example of groups that engaged in nontraditional sexual relationships, I mentioned NAMBLA (North American Man/Boy Love Association) and people who engage in bestiality. My point was to emphasize that marriage is a long-standing tradition and there is no necessity to change the definition now, regardless of which group wants to change it.

			The secular progressives seized upon the opportunity to distort the meaning of what I said and deviate the conversation away from the definition of marriage by instead focusing on me and trying to paint me as a homophobe who thinks that gay marriage is equivalent to bestiality. Nothing could be further from the truth. I appeared both on CNN and MSNBC to explain that I didn’t think that there was equivalency between the groups mentioned in my answer and to state unequivocally that I had no intention of offending anyone, but I still believe in traditional marriage. The objective media found that explanation satisfactory, but the secular progressive media continued to state that I think that gay marriage and bestiality are the same. This is a very instructive example of how they distort words and meanings, and then cling to the created lies in an attempt to destroy enemies.

			Around the same time, a group of gay activists at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine began their mission as instigators, accusing me of being a homophobe. I was scheduled to be the commencement speaker at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine as well as at the Johns Hopkins School of Education, but decided to withdraw because of the controversy the instigators had successfully created. After years of hard work by the students, I did not want their graduation ceremony to be about me rather than about them and their achievements.

			I received several messages from students who were very disappointed that I would not be speaking at their commencement. Some even threatened to protest if I did not speak. The thing that saddened me most was the fact that many of them indicated that they were afraid to speak out because of potential repercussions from the administration. I certainly like to think that these fears were unfounded, but the fact that they exist at all is troubling. Like so many thousands of Americans I have encountered across the nation, these students had been beaten into submission by secular progressives who have no regard for such fundamental American principles as freedom of speech when that speech is not in agreement with their philosophies. Political correctness has effectively removed their point of view, as well as their rights, from the debate.

			Prior to my decision to withdraw as commencement speaker, I spoke to some prominent members of the gay community at Johns Hopkins. In doing so I found out two important things: First, bestiality is particularly abhorrent in the gay community and the mention of it evokes a very emotional response. Had I known that, I would have avoided the topic, since the last thing I wanted to do was to cause unnecessary offense and distract from the matters at hand.

			Second, I asked if there was any position a person could take that did not include approval of gay marriage that would be acceptable to the gay community. After some consideration, I was told that there really was no other acceptable position. This explains why there was such a ferocious attack on my comments—there really was no argument that could have been made that would not have drawn an emotional response instead of a rational argument.





Responding to the PC Police


			Not only is it important for Americans to communicate about difficult issues, but the method and tone of communication are also very important. Abrasive and reactionary speech can be at least as bad as silence, feeding right into the hands of the PCP. Saul Alinsky advised his followers to level sharp attacks against their opponents with the goal of goading them into rash counterattacks that would then discredit them. To avoid falling into this trap, those of us who are interested in civil discussion should prepare ourselves to refrain from reacting in fear or anger to those who disagree with us or even attack us.

			I frequently remind my attackers that our greater purpose is to engage in intelligent conversation and solve problems. Most who disagree with me are good, intelligent people who also want to solve problems in a reasonable manner. As for those who are not so well intentioned, it is very difficult for them to continue attacking someone who is calm and reasonable. They usually realize fairly quickly that they are the ones who look like fools if they refuse to engage in problem solving.

			It is particularly important when dealing with adversaries to know what points you want to make while remaining focused. This makes constant interruptions, attacks, and attempts to change the subject more difficult. If you are an effective representative of American values, the secular progressives will make every attempt to destroy your character by exposing any mistakes, misstatements, or misdeeds from your past. Naturally, there are no perfect people, present company included, which makes the threats of exposure extremely potent. If a misdeed from your past is exploited, it is best to admit to it, condemn it, and ask, “What more do you want?”

			Sometimes I am asked, “How do you maintain your cool when faced with ridiculous claims and statements by your opponents?” There was a time when I was a hothead, and my temper wreaked havoc in my life until I learned to take myself out of the center of the circle. The real key to staying cool and calm is to relinquish selfishness and always consider the feelings of others. When someone is being particularly mean and nasty, I simply think to myself, He or she used to be a cute little baby, I wonder what happened? Thinking about that question will soften your attitude and lessen the likelihood of an inflammatory confrontation.

			As we discussed earlier in this book, offense and sensitivity are frequently feigned for the purpose of garnering sympathy and further reinforcing the validity of political correctness. However, two can play that game. When the offended party proclaims the injury you have wrought upon them with your words, say something to the effect of: “I can see that you were deeply hurt by my choice of words. It was not my intention to hurt you and for that I am sorry. Now I would like for you to know what I intended to communicate to you and I will use different words that will hopefully convey the spirit of my thoughts and allow our discussion to continue.” If the offended party was truly offended, that will be a sufficient statement, but if they were only pretending to be offended, they will continue to harp on their perceived mistreatment. This exercise is useful because it helps you learn what you are dealing with. If it is just a misunderstanding, frequently the conflict can be alleviated by this kind of open communication.





True Wounds


			Sometimes a true wound can be so deep that it clouds the thoughts of the injured party to the point that they can no longer be objective. In such cases, continued explanations tend to result in diminishing returns or even exacerbations of the misunderstanding. I vividly remember the case of a disabled woman whom I greatly admire because she adopted many children with disabilities that were even greater than hers. Many of her children had complex neurosurgical problems that engaged my skills for many hours at a time. After caring for her many children over the years, one of them experienced a shunt malfunction that caused rapid accumulation of pressure in the head due to the spinal fluid’s inability to escape. I rushed into the hospital in the middle of the night, even being stopped by the police for speeding. We operated on the child and repaired the shunt, but unfortunately the child suffered some brain damage and was never quite the same again. Despite explanations and a long-term relationship, I never saw that mother or any of her children again. I believe the emotional trauma was understandably more than she could handle. Sometimes you just have to realize that you cannot heal all wounds no matter how hard you try.

			In today’s political scene, some people are so traumatized by perceived past injustices that they cannot conceive of any good thing that a group member who they believe has been unfair to them can do. They tend to demonize these individuals for past wrongs perpetrated by others and there is no changing their minds. It is important for the demonized group to understand this mentality and patiently attempt to undo the damage that has resulted in such attitudes. Both Republicans and Democrats can benefit from this advice.





Our Heritage of Free Speech


			Whether by creating hypersensitivity or drawing angry reactions, Alinsky’s organizers’ goal is to make the societal majority feel that their opinion is the minority opinion and that the organizers’ opinion is the majority opinion. The ability to co-opt the mainstream media in this endeavor is a gigantic coup. If the majority of people who are rational, reasonable, and full of common sense feel that their opinions are out of sync with everyone else, it is easy to shut them up and beat them into submission. This is what has occurred in America today. Hopefully by bringing this to light, more people will see the necessity of seizing the banner of bravery just like Nathan Hale, Patrick Henry, and many others in the past who stood up to tyranny.

			Why was freedom of speech so important to our nation’s founders? Many had come from countries like England where verbally opposing the king frequently resulted in a jail sentence or even death. The founders also felt that the free exchange of ideas would result in better government and would prevent government from becoming too big and self-important. These are the very reasons we must once again insist on freedom of speech and expression, and we should be repulsed by the very idea of political correctness that muzzles the populace. Our government does not directly jail dissenters, but it can do so indirectly by expecting the IRS to harass those who oppose its policies. This should be something that completely outrages every American who understands the hard-fought freedoms of our nation, but many have been lulled to sleep by the gradual increase of political correctness and have yet to notice that our fundamental freedoms are in jeopardy.

			It is tempting to simply acknowledge the corrosive effects of political correctness on freedom of speech and say that we will deal with this at some point in the future. The problem with that line of thinking is that the future may not arrive before catastrophic events intervene.

			If we are to survive as a united nation, we must learn how to engage in civil discussion of our differences without becoming bitter enemies. We cannot fall for the Saul Alinsky trick of not having a conversation while trying to demonize each other. Let’s talk about the tough issues without scrutinizing every word and castigating anyone who dares to violate the PC rules. There is nothing wrong with disagreement—in fact, if two people agree about everything, one of them isn’t necessary. I believe we are all necessary so let’s toss out the hypersensitivity and roll up our sleeves and start working together to solve our problems. If each of us is willing to extend the benefit of the doubt or overlook verbal missteps, political correctness will become impotent.

			Action Steps

			 				Try to identify one instance of artificial outrage. Explain to one other person why this is a contrived issue and outline the way it agitates people and cultivates political support for the agitators.

				Readily apologize to a person who is offended by something you said. Explain what you had hoped to convey.

				Attempt to politely disagree with someone who makes a political statement with which you disagree. (Be sure that you choose an appropriate setting.) Engage in a civil discussion of the matter.

				Read Saul Alinsky’s Rules for Radicals to get an idea of how the political correctness police work.





ELITISM



Pride goes before destruction, and haughtiness before a fall.

			PROVERBS 16:18



Coming from inner-city Detroit and going to Yale University represented an astronomical change in my surroundings and life. One of my freshman roommates had a twin brother matriculating at Princeton and a father who was a prominent physician. The other roommate was from a business family. They all seemed very rich to me, being the son of a divorced mother with less education than the maids who cleaned their houses. But my roommates’ wealth and status was minor compared with some of the really rich kids on campus. Many were from very well-known families and traveled around with an entourage of sycophants and admirers. It was not unusual to see parents visiting campus in Rolls-Royces and limousines when I was a freshman and a sophomore. I was surrounded by elites.

			But the way the elites presented themselves was changing. By the end of my sophomore year, the campus was already starting to become radicalized. The Black Panthers were idolized, and the most admired people on campus dressed like hippies and flower children. Marijuana and acid rock had become fashionable, and outward shows of affluence were frowned upon. Elitism on campus, which had previously been defined by wealth, was now defined by identification with the downtrodden people in society and a determination to use one’s superior education and compassion to help them. As this generation of elites grew up, they began to occupy positions of importance in society, becoming college professors and administrators, national television producers, business managers, and politicians. Even though many still enjoyed the fruits of economic prosperity, they continued to identify with those people they considered to be oppressed by the system.

			The makeup of today’s elite class is psychologically and sociologically more complex than what I have just presented, but its development in the Ivy Leagues of the 1960s can explain the dichotomy between what the wealthy members of this class say and what they do. For the most part, they are incapable of seeing any hypocrisy in their own lives while examining with a microscope every facet of their perceived opponents’ lives. They are very happy to give away other people’s money, but guard their own purse strings possessively. The sad thing is that they have become so wise in their own eyes that they have lost objectivity, thus frequently rendering themselves quite useless when it comes to truly improving the lot of the downtrodden in our society.





Do the Elite Really Know Better Than the Rest of Us?


			This arrogance is the chief characteristic of the elites I am concerned about. Wealth, education, and influence are all well and good, but when they lull those who hold them into a state of self-satisfaction where they are convinced of their own perfect wisdom and virtue and shield them from life’s realities, we have a problem. Today’s elites constantly talk about hubris in their opponents but seem unaware of their own lack of humility. They are thoroughly convinced that they are intellectually superior to those people who believe in God, creation, and the Bible, and many use positions of authority at colleges and universities to strictly enforce “open-mindedness” by pillorying any student or colleague who dares question their ideological rantings. The elite class also exists in the mainstream media where elite journalists try to be objective but simply cannot escape the influence of so many years of social propaganda. I believe that in their heart of hearts elites see themselves as society’s savior, but they are blinded by pride to the results of their actions.

			Not all elites are blinded by what they are doing. Very recently I was speaking to a major producer of a major left-wing television network who admitted that the electronic media today is a major propaganda tool used to manipulate society. We have never had this kind of access to the minds of the people and no one really knows the extent to which public opinion can be controlled. Most frightening, these secular progressive elites, as well as some right-leaning elites in the media, are willing to push the limits in order to see just how effective they can be with the imposition of their will upon the people.

			Not all media personalities fit this characterization. Perhaps the greatest television journalist of all time, Walter Cronkite, was decidedly left wing in his political outlook, but was so professional in his reporting that most people were unaware of this. Unless the other elites can ever see the possibility of a flaw in their belief systems or are willing to be objective in their reporting, they are largely unreachable and have little intersection with common sense.

			Politically, elitism knows no single party. Establishing policies that create dependency, like easy food stamps and subsidized health care for families making in excess of $80,000 per year, seems to stroke the egos of both Republican and Democrat elites who believe they are God’s gift to mankind. However, if they examine the long-term consequences of what they are doing, some may begin to understand that true compassion warrants the investment of intellectual capital into finding ways that people can be elevated and imbued with the can-do attitude.





The Elite Oppression of Minority Communities


			In order for elitism to flourish, there has to be another class of people who are willing to acknowledge the superiority of the chosen ones. Elites cultivate this obeisance by providing goodies to the less fortunate ones. In our society today, those goodies consist of multiple kinds of entitlement programs. As the dependency on these programs grows, the position of the elite class is solidified because they will always be seen as the providers who need to be protected from any threats of power redistribution. The elitists constantly find ways to proclaim their goodness and their necessity for the well-being of the “oppressed,” while at the same time declaring how evil their opponents are, and how those evil people would utterly destroy any hope of a reasonable life for the oppressed if they were to gain power.

			The truth is, the liberal policies of the elite class have done little to improve the lot of those who depend so much on them. In America’s black communities, where the goodies have been flowing for decades, rather than seeing improvements in terms of upward mobility, we are seeing deteriorating family structure, increases in violent crimes, growing poverty, and growing dependence. Even with such a blatant record of failure, there is slavish devotion to the elite class who continue to promise more goodies in exchange for votes.

			Black leaders like Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., among others, were great proponents of self-reliance and self-help. I believe they would have been horrified to see the condition of the black community in America today despite their efforts to bring true economic liberation to this important group of Americans. Many of the elites from both parties embrace these men as heroes but propose social policies that do not encourage self-reliance; policies these men would never have approved. Based on their policies, I believe that they subconsciously think that some people are not capable of helping themselves.

			Most of the elite are not humble enough to accept these kinds of criticisms and make changes. I guess that is why they are considered elite. Since we can’t expect them to change, it’s up to the rest of us to do all that we can to help those dependent on the elites to get on their feet. The elite class can’t last long without the votes of these communities.





Escaping Subservience


			One of the most important ways the African American community in particular can end its dependence on the elites is to lower the number of out-of wedlock births. As a result of the number of black babies born out of wedlock in recent years, there is a gigantic economic hole from which many in the community will have to climb out of to achieve the American Dream. That ascension needs to start immediately by teaching young women the importance of self-respect and the consequences of single motherhood—usually the end of the mother’s educational endeavors, limiting her economic success and often condemning her child to poverty. (A 2013 article in US News and World Report by Steven Nelson titled “Census Bureau Links Poverty with Out-of-Wedlock Births” examines this phenomenon, which has been corroborated by many other journalistic sources.) At the same time, we need to provide affordable child care to enable single mothers to further their schooling and prepare for an increasingly technologically sophisticated world. We also have to demonstrate to these mothers that men are not going to disappear or be afraid of them after they obtain advanced education. This is a total myth and if anything, advanced education increases the opportunity to meet someone with similar accomplishments and goals. We must do everything we can to convince these young ladies that they are priceless and can make great contributions to all of mankind. When these valuable citizens gain appropriate self-esteem, they will avoid many careless mistakes and think more independently, weakening the hold the elites have on them.

			Young black women aren’t the only people needing to be freed from the elites. A quarter of the young men in the black community are involved with the criminal justice system, which in many cases compromises their job prospects for the future. Worse than that is the fact that many end up being violently killed or taken off the streets by incarceration for long periods of time. In either case, tremendous intellectual talent is being wasted by a society that can ill afford such losses. Rather than imitating the elite and trying to make these young men feel like victims of discrimination or racism, we must look for ways to empower and help them realize their tremendous value to society.

			Both the men and women in these communities need to be educated about basic economics and wealth creation. One of the reasons the Jewish, Korean, Vietnamese, and other communities have been able to thrive in the United States is that they have learned how to turn over the dollar in their own communities two or three times before sending it out into the larger community. By patronizing the constituents of their own neighborhoods, they allow local merchants and businesspeople to thrive, which not only provides jobs for others in the community but also gives them an opportunity to invest and grow their businesses. The more they grow, the more opportunities they are able to provide to those around them. I have a friend who started his own business as a young black man and has subsequently retired as a multimillionaire, and at least two other African American–owned businesses were started by others who got their initial breaks from him. Economic prosperity for one can mushroom into opportunities for many when greed and vice are not involved. Furthermore, this kind of thinking provides economic independence, and economic independence promotes ideological freedom, rather than creating voting blocs that can be taken for granted. If politicians have to compete for support, they will have to show results, which will be a big win for the black community.

			Although understanding economic principles of wealth development is very important to oppressed communities and will go a long way toward liberating them from the influence of the elite class, even more important is education. When Frederick Douglass was a slave, the master’s wife began teaching him to read after recognizing his exceptional intellectual gifts. When the master found out about this he was angry and instructed his wife to desist immediately, because he felt that education would light the fires of desire for freedom. He was absolutely right in this assessment, so Frederick Douglass went on to find other ways of educating himself. As a consequence, he was not only able to obtain his own freedom but played a vital role in the abolition of slavery as well as in the women’s suffrage movement in the United States. He also lived in Europe and wielded significant influence there; many feel that his involvement and notoriety profoundly affected the decision of the British not to support the Confederacy during the Civil War.

			During the fifties and sixties many people of all nationalities sacrificed life, limb, and physical freedom to win basic rights for blacks in America. Those rights included educational pursuits. During slavery, reconstruction, Jim Crow, and beyond, many blacks would have sacrificed almost anything for an opportunity to be educated. Sometimes, particularly when traveling north with their masters, slaves were able to witness how articulate and sometimes prosperous free, educated blacks were. They began to equate education with freedom. Even as a child growing up in Detroit and Boston, almost all of the adults in our neighborhood emphasized the importance of education and how it would allow me to go far beyond anything they had achieved. Today, even though those educational doors are no longer blocked, many of the people who sacrificed to open those doors would be disappointed to see the indifference with which many of the younger generation treat education.

			It is time in America to empower the people through education, sound economic policies, and the return of honest and responsible media reporting. This will be no small undertaking, because the intellectually elite class will not relinquish their stranglehold without a fight. We must be encouraged by the fact that this is the United States of America: a place for, of, and by the people . . . and there is no place for elitism in our country.

			Action Steps

			 				Identify a member of an elite class and ask the person how he or she would recommend that you assist those stuck in poverty.

				If you are a member of the elite class, ask yourself honestly what you have personally done in the last year to help lift someone from poverty.

				Read and think about 2 Chronicles 7:14.

				If you are offended by the previous suggestion, ask yourself why.





IGNORANCE AND FORGETFULNESS



Throw out the mocker, and fighting, quarrels, and insults will disappear. Anyone who loves a pure heart and gracious speech is the king’s friend. The Lord preserves knowledge, but he ruins the plans of the deceitful.

			PROVERBS 22:10-12



When I was a student at Southwestern High School in inner-city Detroit in the mid-to-late sixties, I was far from popular. By that time my lackluster academic performance during the early years had completely reversed and I was a quintessential nerd. I even carried a slide rule in a holster on my belt and belonged to the Chess Club. I grew quite accustomed to being ridiculed for not being “cool,” but I was generally left alone because of my accomplishments in ROTC and because I was friends with some of the really tough guys, since I helped them with their school assignments.

			When my wife and I attended my twenty-fifth Southwestern High School class reunion in 1994, I was astonished to see that so many of the really cool guys were now deceased, but I was even more amazed at the number of my former classmates who came up to me and said, “We are so proud of you and we tell our children and grandchildren about you all the time, and don’t you remember how we used to encourage you when you were a student at Southwestern?” Of course I was polite, but I certainly didn’t remember many encouraging words and in fact I vividly remember just the opposite.

			It is natural to want to identify with success and distance oneself from failure and embarrassment and to avoid difficulty. This is why people undergo memory alterations as time passes and why we selectively forget painful knowledge. In medicine it is particularly important not to do this because people’s lives could needlessly be put at risk by failure to accurately remember lessons of the past. I explicitly remember the case of an achondroplastic child (dwarfism) who I determined was in need of a highly specialized type of surgery to alleviate pressure on the brain stem. I wrote a letter and spoke to the gatekeeper at the insurance company to no avail. Because they wanted to save money, the insurance company determined that their in-network pediatric neurosurgeon could do the job. They were wrong and ended up paying twice, because I had to do corrective surgery. If they had heeded the medical knowledge that had summarized past lessons about this condition and its treatment, including the need for significant experience and a team approach, needless trauma and expense could have been avoided. Instead, they ignored key facts, willfully ignoring information that would have benefited a child’s health and their bottom line.

			Ignorance, whether it takes the form of revisionism or laziness, can hurt our nation too. If we don’t know our true national history, we won’t be able to recognize the way in which America is drifting. If we don’t have enough basic information to manage our lives, we will give up our freedoms to those who promise to take care of us. It is time for us to stand up and educate ourselves and our children before we allow misinformation and ignorance to destroy our democratic republic.





Historical Revisionism


			People frequently rewrite history to increase self-esteem and to clear their consciences of guilt for historical misdeeds. Historical revision can also go the other way, as historians attempt to discredit figures from the past. Early American history has been rewritten many times in both ways, to suit the beliefs of historians with different educational and philosophical agendas. For this reason, I rarely accept a single account of any historical event. Fortunately one can quickly get a sense of the truth by examining accounts from several different trusted sources.

			There seems to be general consensus around the fact that the founders of this nation were men of great vision and intellect. They thoroughly studied the many civilizations that preceded us to try to determine the common pitfalls inherent in establishing a new government. With hard work, a lot of arguing, and finally an ecumenical prayer to God, they were able to put together a sixteen-and-one-third-page document known as the Constitution of the United States of America, one of the most admired governmental documents in history. This document encapsulated their vision of a nation where the freedom of the people to pursue their dreams was of paramount importance. It created a government that existed for the purpose of protecting the people from foreign invaders, protecting their assets and property, and facilitating their pursuit of happiness. The Constitution mandated minimal government interference in the everyday lives of the average citizen and arranged for the federal government to remain small, allowing state governments to be responsible for most of the legislation.

			Our founders were deathly afraid that our government would do the same thing that virtually all other governments had done previously: expand continually, developing a voracious appetite for the resources of the people. They also feared that as the government expanded it would encroach upon the rights of the citizens. Finally, they were petrified that people would be complacent as the government expanded and would gradually relinquish their rights for a false sense of security. These great men wrote the Constitution the way they did to prevent the worst of their fears from coming true, creating a great and noble framework for virtuous government.

			Some historical revisionists have denigrated the efforts of these great men and emphasized the fact that many of them were slaveholders or had some other flaw commonly seen in the culture at that time. The same historians also highlight our cruelty to the Japanese during World War II where we used hideous internment camps and detonated the only nuclear weapon against fellow human beings in history. They shine a bright light on the history of racism that was rampant throughout America, especially before the crusades of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and they repeatedly remind us of the atrocities witnessed during the Vietnam War, which we lost. By emphasizing these things and other wrongdoings, revisionists attempt to paint the United States as an opportunistic, uncaring, and savage nation in dire need of change.

			There is no question that the United States, like every other nation, has made mistakes. However, what should be emphasized is that we are the first pinnacle nation of the world to wield such enormous power without brutally dominating other nations. We have helped rebuild nations ravaged by wars in which we took part and we have refused to confiscate oil, minerals, and other treasures found in nations we have helped or defeated. I believe it is fair to say that we are the most benign superpower the world has ever known. Furthermore, it is important that we maintain our pinnacle status, because if we lose it, we will be replaced by another world power that is unlikely to be nearly as benign.

			In America, we have a proud history of accomplishment and of helping to save the world from tyranny. Our military is second to none and our technological achievements have transformed the world. We have moved from a nearly apartheid state to a multicultural society with enormous potential and strength that can be significantly enhanced by the kind of leadership that emphasizes a vision that unites everyone as opposed to exploiting differences to advance political causes.

			If most of the people in the country believe that America is generally fair and decent, it becomes more difficult for Saul Alinsky types to recruit change agents and for those on the Far Left to undermine our Constitution. Hence the constant bad-mouthing of our nation to impressionable young people, preparing them to be ripe for manipulation at the appropriate time. In the recent past, the Occupy Wall Street movement, which was replicated in many parts of the country, shows how easily physically destructive actions that compromise the rights and property of others can be incited in those who have been educated this way and also have an entitlement mentality.





Forgetting Our Christian Heritage


			Some historical revisionists have also attempted to diminish the role of God and religion in our nation’s past. A careful examination of the records, however, makes it quite clear that religion was a very important factor in the development of our nation. In 1831 when Alexis de Tocqueville came to America to try to unravel the secrets to the success of a fledgling nation that was already competing with the powers of Europe on virtually every level, he discovered that we had a fantastic public educational system that rendered anyone who had finished the second grade completely literate. He was more astonished to discover that the Bible was an important tool used to teach moral principles in our public schools. No particular religious denomination was revered, but rather commonly accepted biblical truths became the backbone of our social structure. Our founders did not believe that our society could thrive without this kind of moral social structure. In fact, it was our second president, John Adams, who said of our thoroughly researched and developed governing document, “Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.”

			Adams’s quote makes it clear that the founders did not want to extract God from our lives, but rather intended for his principles to be a central feature of our society. What they wanted to avoid was a theocracy-like state where the church dominated public policy or where the government dictated religious practice. That was the whole point of the separation clause of the First Amendment. The secular progressives have zoomed past the intent of the law and tried to replace it with their anti-God propaganda reinforced by bullying tactics. If Americans fail to educate themselves in American history, the revisionists will win this fight.

			And right now it looks like they are winning. The secular progressive movement in America has been successful in removing all vestiges of faith in God from the public square. The very fact that people hesitate to say “Merry Christmas” to strangers lets you know just how successful they have been. Why are they so determined to remove God from our lives? They recognize that if we have no higher authority to answer to than man, we become gods unto ourselves and get to determine our own behavior. In their world, “If it feels good, do it.” They can justify anything based on their ideology because in their opinion, there is no higher authority other than themselves to overrule them. They have a visceral reaction to the mention of God’s word, because it tears at the fabric of their justification system.





Forgetting Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s Advice


			The left wing secular progressives love to invoke the name of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., but only in their historical revision would his views be compatible with theirs. The last thing he would have wanted to see was the culture of dependency that has developed among the very people he fought so hard to free. A strong opponent of godless ideology, Dr. King also rejected the idea that human beings are not responsible for their actions, arguing, “One of the most common tendencies of human nature is that of placing responsibility on some external agency for sins we have committed or mistakes we have made.”

			Later in the same speech, Dr. King spoke of several Americans who rose from less than optimal circumstances of heredity and environment to become successful and greatly admired individuals. Helen Keller, who was born blind and deaf from infancy, was able to overcome these hereditary traits to become one of the most admired people in the world! Franklin D. Roosevelt had infantile paralysis, but rose to become president of the United States. Marian Anderson was born in poverty in Philadelphia, but developed her voice to the point where she became one of the world’s greatest contraltos. Italian composer Toscanini was said to have commented that a voice like hers comes only once in a century! King continued in the speech by citing Jesus Christ as the best example of one who overcame nonoptimal circumstances. His parents were not of high social standing or people of wealth . . . not aristocrats or belonging to any prestigious groups.

			Dr. King concluded: “Not environment, not heredity, but personal response is the final determining factor in our lives. And herein lies our area of responsibility.”

			According to Dr. King, your life is what you make it. Education and career development is the responsibility of the individual, not their parents, teachers, or anyone else, though many would claim that heredity and environment can absolve people of responsibility. Although these two entities can affect one’s life, the most important factor is our response to challenges that arise. If you prepare yourself academically and experientially through various work situations, you can become whatever you dream. That’s the American Dream. I believe the current leadership in America’s black community could learn a great deal about effective leadership by studying some of the writings and the real history of Dr. King.





Ignorance: The Reason History Repeats Itself


			Historical revisionists don’t need to put in any effort if no one cares about history in the first place. Many people find history boring and think that pop culture is much more relevant to citizens today. There certainly is nothing wrong with being up to date on the current social issues that affect our lives, but in order to have the proper perspective on current events, we need to know what happened in the past. For example, it is much easier to understand today’s unrest in the Middle East when you know about the establishment of a sovereign Israeli territory in 1948 and the intense turmoil and controversy surrounding the placement of that nation in an unwelcoming environment.

			And it is much easier to understand why a 7 to 8 percent unemployment rate today is much worse than a rate like that many years ago, because economists were not nearly as facile as they are currently with manipulating numbers. A good student of history would understand that the labor force participation rate is a more accurate indicator of the level of employment nationwide. That number has been steadily declining since 2009. This indicates that many people are simply giving up on working and as a result are not being counted when calculating the unemployment rate that is widely reported. However, the labor force participation rate captures these individuals and is one of the most accurate reflections of the state of employment. These are just two of many examples of the kinds of things informed citizens should know in order to properly interpret what they read in newspapers or hear on the news networks. Many pundits are all too happy to take advantage of the lack of such knowledge in order to manipulate an unsuspecting populace.

			Another excellent reason to be familiar with history is to avoid repeating the same mistakes. The stock market crash of 1929 exacted a severe toll on the people of our nation and our legislators realized, in hindsight, that some of our banking and investment policies had contributed to the crash. Several laws were crafted, including the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial and investment banking activities. Sixty to seventy years later we forgot about many of the horrors of those difficult financial times as well as the reasons why we imposed appropriate regulation on speculative financial activity involving private resources. It only took about twenty years before we faced another near crash. The new regulations that had been put in place were even harsher than the ones that followed the crash of 1929. Perhaps this was an overreaction, but none of it ever had to happen again if our leaders had been more diligent in their study and understanding of history as well as their understanding of human nature, which is characterized by such traits as greed and selfishness. I am not one of those persons who thinks that no regulations are necessary on behalf of the government, but I believe careful attention to history and regular meetings with experts of differing views can provide a great deal of safety and help us avoid unnecessary pain.

			We cannot ignore the socially tragic events of our past, but they can be taught in the context of learning experiences that improved our unity and vision. For instance, we were dragged, kicking and screaming, into both world wars because of our isolationist policies. Many of our allies and some of our own citizens were not happy with our reluctance to enter the fray, but we naïvely thought that we could remain neutral and even benefit financially by selling supplies and arms to anyone with money. From these experiences, we learned the importance of putting the fire out before it gets too big. We also learned that isolationist policies are not a luxury to be afforded the pinnacle nation in the world. With power comes great responsibility and the need to lead rather than simply react to volatile international situations with the potential to affect our security. This does not require our involvement with all the international conflicts in the world, but strategic overt or covert intervention can preclude future difficulties. Even as this book is being written, massive demonstrations and horrific fighting is taking place in Egypt where ultimate control remains uncertain. We clearly don’t know which side to support in the conflict and it is therefore wise to adopt a wait-and-see attitude. This is a marked contrast to the situation that occurred in Iran four years ago when the populace was rising up against an unjust government and we stood by and did nothing as the people were slaughtered by the military. If we use these occurrences as learning experiences that enhance our future international relationships, it will be worthwhile.

			We live in a sophisticated world with many moving parts and it is no longer acceptable or advisable for Americans to know more about the candidates on Dancing with the Stars than they do about current affairs and who their representatives are. More important, we can evaluate what we hear in the news and from political candidates only if we are able to put it in the context of historical knowledge. The more we know about the great things that our nation has accomplished, the more pride and patriotism we cultivate among the citizenry.

			Action Steps

			 				Read some of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s speeches and see if you can determine why he could be considered a conservative.

				Determine to stay abreast of current events by reading an objective newspaper or watching an objective news broadcast daily. Avoid news sources that leave out major stories because they don’t fit a political agenda.

				Consider whether you have ever suppressed knowledge or arguments that disprove a viewpoint that you hold.

				If you identify an area where you have revised history or selectively ignored a fact, admit it. Challenge those with whom you disagree to do the same.





BIGOTRY



It is sin to despise one’s neighbors; blessed are those who help the poor.

			PROVERBS 14:21



When my mother, brother, and I returned to Detroit after living in Boston for a couple of years, we moved into a multifamily dwelling in a racially mixed neighborhood. It was the early sixties, I was ten years old, and the civil rights movement was still in its adolescent stages. We lived adjacent to the railroad tracks, which served as the line of demarcation between primarily black and primarily white communities. Since our home was on the white side of the tracks, my brother and I attended Higgins Elementary School, where there were only a handful of black students, most of whom were assigned to the special education section. I was very slight in build, so I was assigned to a regular classroom even though my academic performance was abominable, because the administrators recognized that there was a lot of violence in the special education classrooms and that my size might not be conducive to long-term survival. Racial stereotyping was common and widely accepted among both adults and children and racially charged comments were often heard.

			The black kids were greatly outnumbered in our neighborhood and tended to be rather docile and submissive in order to avoid trouble. On the other side of the tracks there were a number of black gangs that tended to be quite aggressive toward one another and toward whites. There was a community center nearby on the black side of the tracks that was well equipped and attracted youngsters from both communities with its after-school activities. On most days everyone got along at the center, but whenever there was an interracial fight the spectators promptly chose sides based on race. The adult supervisors would intervene quickly, but at times the feelings were so intense that fights between black and white gangs ensued, sometimes with significant injuries.

			Although I never joined one of the gangs, I knew a lot of people who were in them and was privy to the conversations of both black and white gang members. Hate speech and animosity were rampant on both sides, with an abundance of derogatory and hateful names being casually tossed about. Because of my religious upbringing and the constant preaching of my mother about God’s love and the need to treat everyone equally, I never bought into the race baiting and hatred that I saw all around me. Nevertheless, I became very aware of the negative opinions and inappropriate emotional attitudes in both the black and white communities. I saw black gangs plotting against white individuals in the same way that white groups plotted against black individuals. In other words, the prejudice, hatred, and racism were not exclusive to only one group.

			I can vividly remember being the only black student in my eighth-grade math class at Wilson Junior High School in Detroit. We had a substitute math teacher from one of the Slavic countries who just could not comprehend how I was able to constantly achieve the highest math scores on all the tests. She was constantly sending notes home to my mother about the miraculous achievements in my academic endeavors. I seriously doubt that she was a bad person, but she had been fully indoctrinated into the belief that blacks were intellectually inferior, so my success was a miracle in her eyes.

			I also remember seeing black kids throwing rocks at Hasidic Jews simply because they dressed differently and because no one was stopping them from engaging in such racist and mean-spirited acts. In retrospect, one of the cruelest things I’ve ever witnessed was the taunting, teasing, and harassment of elderly people who had difficulty getting around. These are only a few examples of the latent prejudice that exists in our society.

			In my experience, bigotry tends to be a product of ignorance. The more sheltered one is, the more likely one is to have negative views about someone who belongs to an unfamiliar group. Areas where bigotry is damaging the unity of American society are race, religion, gender, age, and sexual orientation. Let’s look at each of these individually.





Racism


			Racial bigotry is certainly much less common in America today than it was when I was growing up. Because segregation was so prevalent, there were not a lot of opportunities for members of different races to work together and socialize together. Since whites held the most powerful and lucrative positions in society, most of them were certainly in no hurry to share those positions with others. Blacks, on the other hand, were becoming progressively more educated and therefore impatient to share the fruits of their labors. This eagerness was frequently misinterpreted by whites who coined the term uppity to characterize those blacks who, in their opinion, didn’t “know their place.” Those blacks who were very docile and cooperative were frequently rewarded with better jobs and more money, while the less subservient blacks were humiliated and disrespected.

			It was common for whites to believe that blacks were dirty, unintelligent, and sexually promiscuous. These beliefs informed hiring practices and property distribution. Many of the whites in those days found ways to rationalize their unjust treatment of fellow human beings, arguing that they were not racists but rather protectors of traditional values. It wasn’t unusual for some whites to say that blacks should be grateful to have been brought out of the African jungles where they faced a very meager existence. (Talk about historical revisionism and elitism, especially since the lives of blacks in Africa were complete; they had knowledge of how to live off the land, something that American whites of that time would probably have had difficulty doing if they were placed there.)

			Unfortunately, blacks also harbored some false assumptions about whites. As a youngster I frequently heard that white people carried lice and that you had to be very careful when you were around them or you would get them too. It was also frequently said that whites were greedy and cruel. Obviously, none of the things that were said about either group were true, but these kinds of bigoted notions were passed down through the generations, thereby poisoning race relations.

			Though the days of legalized segregation are over, racist bigotry and prejudice still exist today, both in overt and covert ways. I can remember times when I would be walking in a white neighborhood and in short order a police car would show up, undoubtedly summoned by a concerned onlooker. Unfortunately, this and worse still happens today, as evidenced by the Trayvon Martin case. A neighborhood watchman, George Zimmerman, suspicious of the young black man who was walking through the neighborhood late at night, shot and killed Martin after an altercation. The real tragedy is that a young life was lost and another life ruined because both individuals made assumptions about the other that were probably untrue. I hope this tragedy is not useless and we can learn something about how neighborhood watchpersons should be trained by police and what types of weapons, if any, they should use. I love the idea of tasers for neighborhood guardians, because they usually are not lethal.

			More subtle than assuming someone to be a criminal because of his or her race, expecting someone to vote a certain way or follow a certain philosophical line of thinking simply due to skin color is every bit as outrageous and unfair as Jim Crow laws. To facilitate dependency by giving able-bodied people handouts rather than requiring they work for pay is every bit as cruel (even if unintentionally so) as the activities practiced by racists of the past. If the guilty parties could exercise enough humility to recognize that they might actually be doing harm to those they purport to help, I’m certain that things could be done fairly quickly and in cooperation with others of goodwill to improve the plight of millions of Americans.





Religious Bigotry


			Religious bigotry is also a problem today. While we might think we only see it in the streets of Iran or Egypt, and congratulate ourselves for being extremely tolerant when it comes to religious freedom, we still need to make progress in this area. A close look at our attitudes nationally reveals a drastic need for improvement in our understanding of religious tolerance as a fundamental pillar of the American Constitution.

			It is widely believed that throughout history more people have been killed in the name of religious causes than any other cause. Often religious crusaders are so certain that only they can be right, that they will stop at nothing to either convert others or eliminate them. Certainly the Islamic extremists of today feel that way, just as the Christian crusaders felt years ago. This history of intolerance by some religious adherents has understandably caused many people to shun religion and to look unfavorably upon those seen as religious.

			As a Christian, I can fully understand the aversion to religious extremism and hypocritical religious propaganda put in place to create wealth and maintain positions of a very few leaders. Jesus Christ would also have an aversion to this kind of false religion. He preached love, acceptance, and forgiveness. Even though he was all-powerful, he led a humble life directed toward improving the lot of others, but the Christian movement that he started has been so distorted by some that it is sometimes hard to recognize.

			If one is able to cut through all the garbage and analyze the real principles set forth by Christ, they can be distilled into two major entities: love of God and love of your neighbor. That means respecting what God has told us and being caretakers of all He has created. And it also means being respectful of every man and being fair to all people regardless of how they may differ from you. It means leaving the judging to God and not trying to impose our ideological beliefs on others. This last point is one that is particularly important for those entering the political arena and who may at some point assume power.

			Whether or not one likes Christianity or any other religion is not the point, however. Our Constitutional Bill of Rights states that “Congress can make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” In other words, our government should not support particular denominations or religious groups, but neither should it prevent anyone from expressing their religion.

			Unfortunately, our nation seems to have forgotten the latter part of that statement. The media is peppered with stories about communities or organizations demanding the removal of patriotic symbols or crosses from private property simply because such symbols are offensive to some. Recently a community in the Northeast was forced to remove a memorial to fallen soldiers because the memorial was reminiscent of a Christmas tree. In this case the bias was so great against the concept of Christmas that it trumped respect and honor for our fallen military personnel.

			In the rotunda of the original Johns Hopkins Hospital is a twelve-foot statue of Jesus beckoning those in need to come to him. When that statue was first placed, several physicians and scientists vehemently protested its presence, stating that Hopkins was a scientific institution and there was no room for religious symbols. The controversy grew so ferocious that the decision was made to remove the statue. Ironically, the protest against the removal of the statue was even more vehement and the statue was brought back and has remained in that location to this day.

			As upsetting as religious bigotry is in the private sphere, it is an even more serious concern in our government. There is nothing in our Constitution that supports the banning of manger scenes or other signs of Christmas in public places, yet some have called for their removal. For example, at Palisades Park in Santa Monica, California, manger scenes had been on display every Christmas for over fifty years, but they were banned in 2012. And this type of intolerance is proliferating throughout the country.

			The fact that some people want to take the words under God out of the “Pledge of Allegiance” and others want to remove the words In God we trust from our money, demonstrates the depth of misunderstanding of the First Amendment’s separation clause. The spirit of religious freedom supports various kinds of religious expression, and instead of trying to restrict one group or another from celebrating their religious beliefs through symbolism, we should be encouraging free expression on behalf of every group.

			Totalitarianism always starts with restrictions on the rights of others. We must avoid this at all costs. George Washington even said, “If the freedom of speech is taken away, then dumb and silent we may be led, like sheep to the slaughter.”

			It is appalling how far our country has strayed from the principles of the founding fathers. In Michigan, in 2013, a high school banned its football team from praying on the field. The practice of team members opting to pray together was started when one of the students had requested that the team pray for an ill family member after a game. The ten-year-old tradition was banned because of “concern” by the family of a current team member who brought the practice to the attention of the ACLU. And in Washington, the capital of our country, our congresspeople are not allowed to say “Merry Christmas” in their mail unless they pay for the postage out of their own pockets. The Congressional Franking Committee, which reviews all mail, will not “frank” (send free of charge) any congressperson’s mail that has “Merry Christmas” or any other holiday greeting in it.

			These are examples of the kind of bias that ignores the rights and freedom of those who disagree with the purveyors of prejudice. The bias exists on both sides of the political spectrum as demonstrated by the horrible things the Christian Right said about Bill Clinton because of his affair with a White House intern, when in fact several Republican leaders were also engaged in extramarital adventurism. It would probably be a good thing for both sides to stay out of private issues that don’t affect one’s duties. Many on the Right exhibit bigotry by assuming that those who believe in the sacredness of big government programs have socialistic tendencies. This is of course not true and many people who have grown up with significant government assistance simply don’t know any other way of life and are patriotic American citizens. We all need to take a deep breath and concentrate on educating the populace about true liberty and justice while respecting one another’s religious—or nonreligious—beliefs. No one’s religious beliefs should have to be hidden in a truly free and open society, but if we the people do not stand up against the religious bigotry that exists right now, we may end up without any religious freedom at all.





Sexism


			Sexist bigotry is another problem, despite the tremendous strides we have made toward achieving equality of the sexes in America. I can easily remember when people were shocked to see a female commercial airline pilot or executive in a large organization. Female surgeons were almost unheard of when I was a child. Today more than half of the medical students in America are female and the chiefs of surgery at many large institutions, including Johns Hopkins, are women. As was the case with blacks, once people had an opportunity to work closely with members of the opposite sex, it became readily apparent that they were just as competent as anyone else.

			Nevertheless, there remain in our society people who doubt the ability of women to be good police officers, firefighters, or military combatants. They claim that women are too weak for such jobs. Anyone who is truly objective would have to admit that there are many men who are too weak for such jobs and there would be no rationale for putting such men in those positions just as there is no rationale for putting such women in those positions. On the other hand, there are many women who are stronger than most men and can easily handle these roles. We need to start evaluating people based on their abilities and not on their sex or other congenital characteristics.

			Keep in mind that not all the sexist bias is directed toward one gender. In recent years, sitcoms and commercials have portrayed men, particularly fathers, as buffoons. People seem to derive great pleasure from mocking men’s foolishness while extolling women’s wisdom and cleverness. While they may feel that this type of sexism is fine because there was discrimination against women for so many years, this is a childish mentality. Both men and women should be treated with dignity and respect. When men and women are able to work together as equals by bringing their specific skills and talents to the table, a type of synergy develops that can be beneficial to everyone.





Ageism


			Ageism is another form of bigotry today. In the early 1900s, the average age of death in America was less than fifty years. Now that mark is approaching eighty years of age. As a result, we are seeing larger numbers of elderly individuals in our society. I sometimes observe younger people acting quite impatient when they are behind an elderly individual who is moving slowly up a ramp or flight of stairs. Instead of showing disrespect, these young people need to think about the fact that they, too, one day will be relegated to the slow lane and will be appreciative of patience by others.

			Younger people need to realize that the opportunities they have today exist largely because of the hard work and sacrifices of those who preceded them. Certainly we would not enjoy the kind of freedom we have today if our ancestors had not valiantly fought and defeated the axis powers of World War II. Not only should we be thankful to the brave men who fought and died for our sakes but we should remember the millions of women who occupied the vacancies in the factories created by the military draft. From their strength and determination were created more airplanes, tanks, and mortars than anyone could have imagined, thus supplying the fuel for military victory. As a mark of respect, we should be more than happy to care for these elders who have done so much for us.

			On the flip side, many older people have negative impressions of younger people and their work ethic, or their use of drugs, and their musical selections. If they stimulate their memory banks they will discover that when they were young, older people said some similar things about them. Of course we all have biases based on where we are in the stages of life. Wisdom gives the kind of perspective that allows one to appreciate others wherever they are along life’s journey.

			It is also important for the generation in power currently to realize that it has an obligation to the next generations, which if unfulfilled will likely create a level of animosity toward them that is unprecedented. Thomas Jefferson said it was immoral to leave debt to the next generation. He would be speechless if he were resurrected today and saw that we are leaving the next generation a $17 trillion national debt. If the next generations were paying closer attention, it is likely that they would be protesting the unbridled borrowing against their future. The stark reality is that if we don’t immediately assume fiscal responsibility and adopt policies that are conducive to economic growth, an economic disaster will ensue that will affect all generations. This is another area where a little common sense will go a long way.





Homophobia


			Finally, there’s the issue of bigotry regarding sexual orientation. As I stated earlier, people who have differing opinions about gay marriage are likely to always exist. There has been a long and shameful history of gay bashing in America that thankfully is waning. However, this bigotry can still be seen in the assumption by many on the Right that gays should not have access to children because they are more likely to commit rape or engage in aberrant sexual indoctrination. If this is true, it should be relatively easy to prove statistically, but such proof has yet to be provided.

			Unfortunately, the mantle of hatred has been taken up by the other side, which feels that hateful speech and actions toward anyone who doesn’t embrace the gay agenda is justified. Obviously hatred on either side of the opinion ledger is unacceptable and should be shunned by all.





Defeating Bigotry


			Unless we are able to apply both condemnation and praise equally and objectively, we will do nothing except exacerbate the social relationships that are vital to a healthy society. The problems facing America are so overwhelming that we can ill afford to expend energy on issues stimulated by bigotry of any type. Unless we are able to focus on the big-picture items, like many societies before us, we will be agents of our own destruction. I strongly believe that if we adhere to the creed “one nation, under God, indivisible with liberty and justice for all,” that we can avoid the pitfalls that have so effectively disabled the pinnacle nations that preceded us. Let us live the words, rather than just allow them to roll off our tongues without thinking.

			Action Steps

			 				When ready to call someone a nasty name, stop and evaluate the situation from that person’s point of view.

				Stand up for the rights of someone with whom you disagree.

				Identify an area where you have participated in bigotry and plan two concrete actions you can take this week to remedy the situation.

				Be aware of bigotry shown toward you and plan two concrete ways to civilly confront the bigots.





NO WINNERS IN POLITICAL FIGHTING



A troublemaker plants seeds of strife; gossip separates the best of friends.

			PROVERBS 16:28



I worked as a supervisor of highway cleanup crews around the Detroit area during the summers of 1970 and 1971. Mostly from inner-city Detroit, the young men in these crews were not overly ambitious and enjoyed having a good time. At first they were always interested in knowing the minimum amount of work required of them in order to be paid. They were quite clever in devising schemes that would meet that minimum requirement without exerting excessive effort.

			Since they were particularly averse to working long hours in the hot sun, I proposed a framework that would allow them to do the bulk of their work early in the morning before rising temperatures made work unpleasant. Instead of paying them by the hour, I would pay them for a full day’s work when they had collected a certain amount of trash. Prior to such an offer, they each worked independently while surreptitiously keeping an eye on how much work was being done by the others. Now they became more insistent on efficiency and the best way to quickly complete the work. They devised methods of working together, which greatly enhanced not only their efficiency but their satisfaction. Working faster and more effectively than any other crews became a badge of pride for them and they actually looked forward to their work, while at the same time establishing very cordial working relationships with one another. There were occasional days when dissension arose in the ranks and on those days there was a noticeable decline in the crew’s effectiveness. If an outside force wanted to lessen the effectiveness of a crew, they would sow seeds of discord, and simply watch them grow.

			The work crew mirrors the political landscape in our country. When working toward the common goal of American people’s welfare, Republicans and Democrats get along relatively well. Even though they have philosophical differences they are able to work together to pass legislation that is beneficial for everyone. When special interest groups influence one side or the other, creating dissension, Congress doesn’t work well at all. Unfortunately, polarizing influences—such as unions that want what they want, gay rights groups, isolationists, and others who cannot or will not consider the opinions of others—have become stronger in recent years, robbing from the pool of moderate legislators and increasing the numbers of extreme legislators. Their efforts explain why it is so difficult to come to consensus on almost anything.





“My Way or the Highway”


			Washington, DC, is dysfunctional today because the primary two political parties have become opponents instead of teammates with different approaches to the same goal. In a speech not long ago, President Obama referred to the Republicans as enemies. While it was wrong of him to refer to them as such, many of the party probably see themselves as his enemies, largely because of the Affordable Care Act, the biggest governmental program in the history of the United States, which was passed without a single Republican vote in the House or the Senate. Never before has any major society-changing piece of legislation been passed in this country without bipartisan effort. During the bill’s passage, I had an opportunity to speak with one of the president’s senior staffers and said that this unilateral act would create an unprecedented level of dissension and rancor that could preclude cordial working relationships for an extended period of time. The response I got was “So what? That’s nothing new.”

			This “my way or the highway” approach has resulted in disaster. Influenced by special interest groups, like some of the insurance companies that stood to benefit from the exchanges if they worked well, the Trial Lawyers Association, which supports anything that doesn’t include tort reform, and many liberal universities, which blindly support anything disguised in the mantle of liberalism, Democrats tried to create a bandwagon effect to alleviate any anxiety felt by the public. But by rushing to pass the bill while they still controlled the House and Senate, the Democrats passed a program so massive that many components of it have not even been tested. As Nancy Pelosi once famously said, “We have to pass it, so we can see what’s in it.”

			As we are finding out what’s in it, more groups, including labor unions that originally supported it, are withdrawing their support. A program that was supposed to reduce costs and allow people to keep their insurance if they wanted to, is raising costs and making it impractical for people to keep their previous insurance. It is also rapidly expanding the number of part-time workers in our country because the law does not require employers to provide health care insurance for part-time workers. The result will funnel almost everybody into government health care.

			Although some of the Democrats may have felt temporary joy when they passed the bill, in the long run, they destroyed harmony. The Democrats now have an albatross around their necks with Obamacare and will forever be blamed for destroying a reasonable health care system that needed improvement, but was working for 85 percent of the populace. The Republicans were shut out of the process and have been largely marginalized, and they continue to weaken themselves with internal squabbling. Everyone loses when our politicians and our people engage in this kind of political infighting.

			I can remember a time when senators and congresspeople from different political parties were friends and happily worked together to help our nation prosper. In recent years politicians have capitulated to divisive forces that drive wedges into every crack and then hype the differences of opinion to force each side deep into their ideological corners, making it difficult to compromise without appearing to surrender. A prime example is the federal budget battles we seem to face annually. They have become games of brinksmanship where both parties participate in a game of chicken. The goal is not to solve problems but rather to pin on opponents the blame for lack of progress or for a government shutdown. Those representatives who play this game rather than represent the will of their constituencies should be voted out of office regardless of their party affiliation, and should be replaced by people who understand the dangers of fiscal irresponsibility and moral decay.

			Many of our politicians seem to relish their role as dividers today. It is essential to the viability of a united nation that we learn to recognize their tactics and resist. If we are fragmented, we cannot provide a united response to tyranny, and we certainly cannot get things done effectively.





Division Tactics


			A favorite tactic of dividers is the demonization of their opponents. It is rare for them to engage in a rational conversation but they are eager, particularly when surrounded by people of like mind, to viciously castigate those with opposing views. Usually the questionable motive they ascribe to their victim is the very same thing they are guilty of themselves. It is sometimes tempting to get into the mud pit with them and hurl insults, but this serves to lower one to their level and accomplishes nothing. For instance, recently a prominent congresswoman stated that it was not possible to cut one penny from the federal budget, and implied that those advocating this were heartless. The sad thing is that anyone who thinks at all knows that this is not true, but they are more loyal to their party than to truth or the well-being of future generations.

			Another tactic of the dividers is to hold up one of their own as an example of someone who has been treated unjustly in some fashion, and say that this is what their opponents want to do to everyone. Last year, Democrats claimed that a Georgetown law student was poorly treated by those who did not wish to make free birth control pills available to her. Not only did they say that Republicans discriminated against her by refusing to pay for her birth control but they suggested that this refusal meant the Republicans were engaged in a “war on women.” The argument had very little substance or truth but was nearly wholly focused on victimization and blame.

			Demagoguery is another tool of dividers. Dividers on both sides of the aisle make sweeping and often obviously false statements about their opponents, recognizing that most people understand that this is foolishness, but a growing number don’t think for themselves and blindly trust their political leaders, believing everything they say. These gullible voters believe emotionally manipulative arguments presented by strong leaders, especially when the arguments are repeated frequently and are not called into question by most of the media.

			Yet another device used by the dividers is quoting their opponents out of context. The extreme media uses this technique frequently and when they are caught, they simply say “My bad” and quickly move on. All of these techniques are designed to call into question their opponent’s character and set them up as enemies of the people who should be resisted on every level. It is my fervent hope and prayer that “the people” will soon awaken and recognize that they are being manipulated by real enemies—those who are constantly trying to divide us and make us believe that we are one another’s enemies.





“We the People” or “They the Government”?


			Over the course of time many Americans have forgotten that “we the people” are actually at the top of the food chain as far as authority is concerned in this nation. The Republicans don’t run our nation. The Democrats don’t run our nation. We do. However, by dividing and engaging in political squabbles, we have allowed the government to grow so large and powerful that it has now become the boss, progressively taking charge of all of our lives. It has reached the size where it is incredibly dangerous for one half of the dividers to take control, since they can then wreak havoc on the lives of those who oppose them.

			For example, the IRS targeted Tea Party organizations for intense scrutiny and unfair treatment. To add insult to injury, the head of the IRS pleaded the Fifth Amendment rather than answer questions about her involvement in the scandal. Other government officials have said they had adequately investigated the problem and were sure no one in the government’s executive branch knew anything about the decision to persecute American citizens. However, congressional testimony has subsequently revealed that the offending agents did receive instructions from higher-ups in Washington.

			What can we do about this type of situation? In times like this, the people must understand their power and their responsibility. This means getting together in groups like early citizens of this country did, discussing the problems and working together to put pressure on their elected representatives to use all available legal avenues to flush out the truth and punish the culprits. If illegal actions by dividers are just allowed to fade away with little or no consequences, we can be guaranteed to have repeat performances and significant exacerbations of this kind of abuse.

			In the 2012 presidential election, tens of millions of Americans did not vote even though they were eligible to do so. I have had an opportunity to talk to thousands of such people who have become so discouraged and disillusioned by the bickering of their representatives that they have simply given up on our nation and its promise to be centered on the people. I encourage those people to fight rather than give up, but this should be a fight for unity, not for a party. If Americans simply choose to vote for the person who has a D or an R by their name, we will get what we deserve, which is what we have now.

			I would love it if party labels were not allowed on ballots and people were forced to actually know who they were voting for. Blind loyalty to a party platform is tantamount to relinquishing the important duties of intelligent voting. Leaders of both parties want to have voters who will blindly follow them and not even consider what’s being said by their opponents. This was not the intention of the multiparty system. Rather it was to make sure that different sides of the issues were carefully examined, allowing the average citizen to then make an intelligent choice. I believe that it would be beneficial to the future of our nation to find ways to increase the likelihood that voters would actually know about the person for whom they are voting, rather than their party affiliation.





Strength in Unity


			In 1968 I was a diehard Detroit Tigers baseball fan. I listened to almost every game and could tell you quite a bit about each of the players. That year the Tigers won the American League pennant for the first time in thirty-seven years, which resulted in great unity across racial and socioeconomic barriers throughout the city. Even more remarkable was the team spirit that created almost miraculous comebacks in what appeared to be impossible situations. Every night there was a different hero and the esprit de corps was magical. The World Series was played against the St. Louis Cardinals, who amassed a three-games-to-one lead. Although things looked grim for the Tigers, no one in Detroit was willing to give up on them, because of the incredible comebacks they had witnessed all season long. Because of that unity and belief in one another, and the backing of the fans, the team won the last three games, taking the World Series crown in seven games. Anyone who does not believe in the power of unity certainly did not experience the 1968 Detroit Tigers.

			That same kind of unity is possible among the people of our nation with the right kind of leadership. But we the people must for ourselves determine that we will be indivisible regardless of the leadership, and we must exercise our ability to identify the divisive forces and vote them out of office.

			If we are to put an end to division, people from all political persuasions will have to stop fighting one another and seek true unity, not just a consensus that benefits one party. Right now, some of the Democrats say, “We all want to help people,” but their next sentence is about how Republicans want people to die. One Democratic representative famously said, “The Republican health plan is for people to die quickly.” Republicans, on the other hand, often talk about how Democrats want to change America into a socialist country. They may not intend to sow seeds of discord but the constant spewing of hatred is having a deleterious effect on the unity of the nation. The America haters and extremists may not be that concerned about the well-being of the country, but reasonable people from both political parties must be able to see the big picture and not fall into the traps set by those who wish to divide and conquer. We must be able to sit down and engage in civil discussion without casting aspersions on others.

			Action Steps

			 				Pretend that you are in a different political party from yours and that you must give a rational defense of something you currently strongly disagree with that the other party embraces.

				Ask the people who spend the most time around you to let you know if and when you are being intolerant.

				Determine to study at least two alternatives to the Affordable Care Act.

				Invite friends and neighbors over for a civil political discussion.





ENSLAVING OUR CHILDREN—DON’T SELL THE FUTURE



Good people leave an inheritance to their grandchildren, but the sinner’s wealth passes to the godly.

			PROVERBS 13:22



I have a lot of very wealthy friends and have watched with interest over the years how they raised their children. One family I knew always provided their several children with the best of everything including limousine drivers and top-of-the-line clothing. There was always an abundance of maids, gardeners, and other people to care for personal needs. Unforeseen circumstances abruptly ended their life of luxury and no significant inheritance was left for the children. If they had lived a slightly less extravagant lifestyle and put away a small fraction of their enormous income each month, the tragic event would not have had such a profound effect on their lives. Living large and disregarding the future was a major mistake for this family, and it continues to be a predominant issue for today’s families from all socioeconomic groups.

			Unfortunately today in America, many parents appear to be more concerned about their own lifestyles than the financial landscape they are leaving behind for those who will follow us. Our national debt, which is the accumulation of annual federal budget deficits, is now approaching $17 trillion with a trajectory that could take us well beyond $20 trillion within the next few years. These astronomical numbers represent new financial landmines unlike anything we have encountered previously. We do not know what the result of this kind of debt will be, but it can’t possibly be good!





Debt Leads to Disaster


			There are recent examples of what happens to nations that continue to accumulate debt without regard to its consequences. Like ancient Rome, modern Greece continued to expand the dole for all citizens while increasing taxes on businesses and doing nothing to foster the economy’s growth. As it became clear to lending nations that this pattern was continuing with no imposition of fiscal responsibility, they became less willing to make additional loans to the Greek government, precipitating a crisis. As the Greek government worked to cut down on spending, Greek citizens rioted in the streets to protest austerity measures that decreased the monies they felt they were entitled to receive from the government.

			It is hard to believe that our leaders in both political parties do not understand that they are jeopardizing the financial future of the next generations by allowing continued debt accumulation, even if they are slowing the rise of that debt. The government recently announced it will pay down our debt by $35 billion in the next quarter. This sounds good, but that equals about 0.02 percent of the total amount owed. They will probably pat themselves on the back and proclaim what a great job they are doing while at the same time borrowing even more during the next quarter rather than continuing the downward trend in borrowing.





Our Ballooning Debt


			Here are some interesting facts of the last few years, demonstrating how exponentially the problem is increasing: In 2007 the United States federal debt was 64 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP). By 2012, the federal debt had risen to 103 percent of GDP. It is still growing, although admittedly at a slower pace. The implementation of Obamacare and the progressive aging of the populace at large will do nothing to help these numbers.

			And as of March 19, 2012, the national debt had increased more during the three years and two months of the current administration than during the eight years of the previous administration. Anyone with a modicum of common sense can see that this is a huge problem and that whoever downplays it or uses rosy language to assuage the anxiety of the populace is disingenuous at best.

			Many, particularly in the Democratic Party, seem to feel that this level of debt is not a serious problem because the U.S. government has the ability to print money. Unfortunately, this solution cannot be sustained indefinitely because the more money we print, the more we devalue the dollar, thereby gradually weakening our financial foundation. Since Franklin D. Roosevelt decoupled the U.S. dollar from gold, our currency has been backed only by our good name. Not only has this resulted in fiscal policy problems, but it has also steadily increased the gap between the wealth of the rich and poor in this country and provided the opportunity to do a lot of fancy currency manipulation. Nothing good will happen if we continue along this reckless course of fiscal irresponsibility.





Economic Growth as a Solution


			I believe there is some relatively painless budget cutting that can be done, because there is a fat layer in virtually every governmental budget, but the real emphasis should be on growing the economy, which has been extremely sluggish for the last several years. I have great respect for economists and their complex theories, but I don’t believe sophisticated theories are necessary to spur economic growth in our country. We have the highest corporate tax rates in the world, which obviously encourage many U.S. companies to conduct business outside of America. We also have high individual taxation rates and high rates for small businesses. None of this is conducive to economic growth, particularly during times that resemble a recession.

			Couple this with excessive governmental interference in business and the imposition of a national health care program that adds substantially to the cost of each employee and you have a formula for persistent anemic growth. If the rest of the world, and especially China, loses confidence in America’s ability to handle its fiscal responsibilities and calls for repayment of the money we owe them, an unimaginable economic crisis would likely ensue.





Ignore the “Spiders”


			When I was nine or ten years old, some friends and I were climbing a rock mountain located in Franklin Park in the Roxbury section of Boston. We felt we were invincible and paid little attention to the signs forbidding such activities. I had climbed those rocks on many occasions and really didn’t even consider the possible consequences of falling—death or great bodily harm. This particular day, I was very high on the rock face when the ledge I was standing on broke, leaving me dangling with my hands tightly gripping the protruding rocks. At that point I realized that my life was in danger and it was my own fault. I earnestly prayed to God asking Him to save me and promising that I would never engage in such stupid activities again. Suddenly off to my right, I saw a cubbyhole large enough to admit my hand, providing me a better position from which I could place my feet and continue my climb. I have never been a fan of big, hairy wolf spiders and the cubbyhole featured a nest of them, but considering the alternatives, they looked like beautiful, welcoming creatures and I happily placed my hand in their domain. Gaining that leverage, I was able to complete my ascension to the top of the mountain for the very last time. I was never even tempted to climb it again.

			Our government reminds me of myself in this story as it pushes its debts higher and higher, ignoring the warning signs posted by history. Feeling invincible, it brushes off concerns about the fragility of financial markets easily panicked by rumors as a result of the vulnerability created by debt. It ignores the U.S. Constitution, our chief warning sign, which describes the responsibilities of the government toward the people, attempting to preclude a massive and intrusive governing structure that would require so much spending.

			If we fail to heed these warnings, unexpected disaster will leave us desperately grasping for solutions. Eventually, something is going to slip. Just as entering the domain of the spiders was not a pleasant option for me as a child, adopting a policy of fiscal responsibility is an unpleasant option for our government, which seems to have difficulty distinguishing needs from wants, but there will be no other option.

			The difference between my story and the government’s situation today is that I learned my lesson after I was miraculously spared, while our government seems incapable of understanding the danger ahead. The debt burden it is creating will have to be paid by someone at some point in time. When we look at history, we see that the ancient Greeks had a complex and large governmental structure that necessitated an ever-growing tax burden on the populace, eventually reducing many of them to serfdom. Although the serf-like population was provided with certain handouts by the state, it was essentially rendered into slaves to the government. Are we in the process of doing the very same thing even though we have examples from the past of the consequences of such a direction?

			I do not doubt the sincerity of individuals in both political parties who want to use government to enhance the lives of the citizenry, but I seriously doubt their understanding of our nation’s founding principles. We the people need the application of smelling salts to awaken us from a slumber that imperils the financial freedom of the next generations. Only through careful analysis of what is going on today and comparison of today’s events with the things that have gone on in societies that preceded us, will we be able to recognize and correct our course. We are engaged in nothing less than a war of philosophies, one of which will lead to prosperity and continued freedom, and the other, which will lead to fundamental changes in who we are and our role in the world. We get to decide which of these futures we want to leave to our children, but we only have a short time to make that decision.





A Balanced Budget


			Balancing the budget is not a goal out of reach. The last time the United States experienced an annual budgetary surplus instead of a deficit was during the Clinton administration, when the House of Representatives was controlled by budgetary hawks and the White House was controlled by a president who was pragmatic and not an ideologue. Even though Democrats and Republicans had different ideas regarding fiscal policy, they were not so entrenched in their positions that they couldn’t understand the other side and compromise. If that spirit of cooperation had continued with multiple years of budgetary surpluses, by now we would have had a much smaller national debt or perhaps as in 1835, no national debt at all, as occurred under the watch of President Andrew Jackson.

			Although our financial problems may seem large and complex, there is nothing about them that is not subject to commonsense solutions. The question is are we willing to abandon ideological gridlock and learn to compromise for the sake of those who follow us in this nation? Also, do we know the meaning of the word sacrifice anymore, and if not, are we willing to learn what that word means and to enact policies that are truly compassionate toward our progeny? We have time to do it if we are willing to act now before the crisis occurs.

			If we spend our money wisely, we can still be quite comfortable without stressing about budgetary shortfalls. We don’t even have to be heartless when it comes to reducing the size of government, even though those who promoted such massive growth were not particularly caring regarding our long-term financial well-being. If we simply do not replace those workers who retire, natural attrition will quickly work in our favor. It might be necessary to retrain and shift some younger workers into areas that need them, but the result will be the same: a slow shrinking of government bloat. These kinds of simple and compassionate solutions cannot only make a big difference in the budget but will improve the esprit de corps.

			During the recent sequester and government shutdown, the executive branch of government, which has the power to decide where to focus the budgetary cuts, made little or no attempt to target the cuts in such a way that they would have a minimal effect on the population at large. Whatever the reasons for this lack of compassionate effort, maturation on both sides of the political aisle should lead politicians to more intelligent budgetary solutions. Everyone knows there is waste and duplication in virtually every federal program. To deny this is a complete divorce from reality. Nevertheless, there are those who insist on continually raising the federal debt ceiling and consequently the federal debt. The directors of every federal program know where the excesses are and if directed to cut a certain small percentage of their budget, could do so without wreaking havoc on the program and its beneficiaries. In order to be fair, the argument should not be about which programs to cut, but rather about what percentage gets trimmed from every federal program with no sacred cows. Such cuts should be made every year until we eliminate the federal budget deficit.

			The people who should be the most concerned about our growing national debt and our future obligations are the young people in our society who will be saddled with massive taxes if we don’t alter our course. When I was in college, students were much more involved in what was going on in the country and there were frequent marches and protests. Other than the misguided Occupy Wall Street movement, there has been very little heard from the next generation about current fiscal issues. It is essential for the next generation of young people to start paying closer attention to what is going on in our country and in the world because it will profoundly affect their future. They need to make their voices heard in order to create some guilt among the members of my generation who are greedily spending their future resources.

			Action Steps

			 				Try to live for one week without accumulating any additional debt.

				Calculate how long it would take to pay off a national debt of $17 trillion if we pay $1 billion per day with no further deficit spending. This does not begin to address the over $90 trillion in unfunded liabilities associated with entitlements. Determine which candidates in the next election would take quickest action to reduce the debt.

				Discuss fiscal responsibility with a young person in your sphere of influence this month.

				When you engage in your next financial endeavor, ask yourself, “How will this affect the next generation?”





PUSHING BACK



If you fail under pressure your strength is not very great. Rescue those who are unjustly sentenced to death; don’t stand back and let them die. Don’t try to avoid responsibility by saying you didn’t know about it. For God knows all hearts, and He sees you. He keeps watch over your soul, and He knows you knew! And He will judge all people according to what they have done.

			PROVERBS 24:10-12



When I was in middle school in Detroit, school life was reasonably peaceful except for the existence of bullies. There was one particular young man whom I will call Jonathan, who took great delight in beating me and pushing me around as well as heaping verbal abuse on me and others. It reached a point where I would alter my pathways in order to avoid him. I tried to stay out of his sight as much as possible and generally kept very quiet when he was around. One day on the way home from school, he began picking on me for no reason and I simply decided that I had had enough and I challenged him to a fight. He did not wish to fight and decided to leave me alone, not only on that day, but every day after. The situation could have ended up quite differently with my taking a severe beating, but even if that had been the case, I had decided that I would withstand as many beatings as necessary to make it clear that I would no longer be his punching bag.

			Even after Jonathan stopped bothering me, there were others to take his place, but that all ended soon after I joined the ROTC in the latter part of the tenth grade and rapidly rose through the ranks. My uniform was covered with ribbons, medals, and ropes that were quite impressive and the bullies had so much respect for that uniform that they showed me great deference.

			Today, we Americans may feel bullied by the PC police, elites, historical revisionists, bigots, dividers, and spenders mentioned in the previous sections. We may be discouraged or afraid, but we must take action. As I learned from my experience with Jonathan, there are two ways of dealing with bullies: standing up to them and gaining their respect. Being quiet or trying to ignore them usually doesn’t work and frequently emboldens them to keep trying to get a reaction from the victim. Taking calm, mature, rational action is the only way to stop them.





Media Bullies


			One of the biggest bullies is the media, which has a tremendous advantage because of the regular platform from which it launches attacks against victims who don’t have a national broadcast stage to disseminate their defense. Like Jonathan, the media will continue its relentless attacks on those it does not approve of until they submit or mount a credible counterattack. It is rare that its victims have an equally loud microphone to refute the accusations leveled by their attackers. This means the victims must take maximum advantage of every weapon they do have.

			Social media provides one very effective way to gain allies against the media bullies. These allies can help one another collectively recall blatantly untrue positions that have been advocated by the bullies in the past. They can also help organize boycotts of the offending media outlets once a critical mass of individuals has been convinced of the problem. Members of the media are very sensitive to ratings and their behavior can be changed by a strong group of individuals with a large following who threaten to boycott them. If social media is used to persuade large numbers of people to stop watching an offending program, the program’s ratings, which determine whether the program will continue, will fall. In the end, most members of the media are more concerned about survival than ideology and will listen when the boycotts are successful, even though they will not admit that the ratings resulted in the changes they subsequently made.





Political Bullies


			Politicians are even more sensitive than the media to organized resistance. They count on the fact that most people are not paying close attention to their votes and their actions and frequently are clueless regarding whether their representatives actually reflect their values. They know that many people go into the voting booth looking for a name that looks familiar or one that is affiliated with their political party and simply vote on that basis with no further critical analysis. When well-organized groups within their constituency begin to point out to others their critical shortfallings, they start to panic and will frequently put out television or radio ads trying to reassure voters that they are on their side.

			It is hoped and anticipated by the current administration, as well as previous administrations, that the majority of American citizens will be much more interested in what their professional sports teams are doing than they will be in holding leaders accountable. The current crop of politicians and many of those who preceded them are not necessarily bad people, but they believe that they know what is best for people and act on their beliefs rather than fulfilling their role of service to them. By stonewalling and depending on the short memory and attention span of the average citizen, it is quite possible for them to skate by with no consequences for their transgressions.

			The way to push back against such officials is to track their votes and demonstrate a consistent voting pattern that is not in the interest of their constituencies. Exposing the negative pattern to the public using social media, radio and television ads, and newspaper articles can wake up apathetic voters and inspire them to take action. The side using this strategy most effectively is likely to be victorious, which means the majority can actually lose if they just sit by and assume that voters will check the records themselves.

			As the opposition, we have to be just as persistent as the supporters of the representatives who truly do not represent their constituents. By that I am referring to the people who say one thing to get elected, but then follow the dictates of party leaders rather than the people’s will. As I said earlier, I would love to one day see elections in America where we do not indicate party affiliations on the ballot. This would force people to actually research the candidates and make intelligent choices. Until then, we must push back hard to inform our fellow citizens of problems with our leaders.

			Citizens also have to be organized enough to keep records of their representatives’ responsiveness so they can vote them out of office if necessary. It would be amazing how responsive representatives would become if this were done on a regular basis. What I am talking about is not complex, but does require real energy and willingness to fight for a truly free society. It has been done before: American farmworkers and environmentalists were able to get the toxic pesticide azinphos-methyl (AZM), a chemical warfare agent, removed from the agricultural market through persistent lobbying that led to legal action. Today we need to follow the example of those Americans and heed the words of cultural anthropologist Margaret Mead, who said, “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it’s the only thing that ever has.”





Academic Bullies


			Another area where a great deal of bullying takes place is on university campuses. Several recent surveys have shown that the vast majority of college professors are liberals. Being a liberal is not a problem unless you only teach from a liberal perspective and penalize students with different views. Unfortunately, university professors generally are not held to high standards of fairness by their administrations because the university officers are also liberal.

			Case in point: A conservative student at Florida Atlantic University was suspended from school because he refused to participate in a class “exercise.” His professor asked the class to write “Jesus” on a piece of paper, place this on the ground, and stomp on it. The student respectfully introduced himself as a devout Mormon, and requested to be excused from the exercise. After the professor insisted, the student went to the professor’s superior only to be suspended from school.

			What can students and citizens do to fight back against political bias on campus? Fortunately the board of trustees at most institutions of higher learning have a significant number of moderates and conservatives as members. These are frequently people who have had great financial success and have experience in the evenhanded application of rules. Grievances concerning political bias should be brought to these individuals in a formal way and they should not be filtered through a university official. Electronic, print, and social media should also be used to publicize the state of affairs if efficient action is not taken by the board of trustees. Most universities are terrified of substantiated negative information about their practices and will act if grievances are brought in a responsible way to their attention. Inaction by the grieved parties will only guarantee continuance of the grievance.





Bullies in Business


			Business entities such as stores and organizations that sell products are especially vulnerable to publicized accusations of bullying and unfairness. Their public persona is their most valuable asset and they can ill afford boycotts or public demonstrations against them. For example, a few years ago a large big-box store chain banned its employees from saying “Merry Christmas.” The negative press associated with this was so significant that they relented the following Christmas season, an excellent lesson for other retailers.

			One of the best examples in American history of collective community action to change grossly unfair practices was the Montgomery bus boycott in the 1950s. The most powerless members of the community, namely the blacks, were able to bring the racist business community to its knees by effectively withholding financial resources, which are the lifeblood of any business. If it is difficult to rally support against what you feel is an unjust practice, it might be wise to reexamine the situation and get other opinions to determine whether you are justified in your opinion.





Unintentional Bullying


			Sometimes bullying is not blatant or even intentional. In 2004 my colleagues and I took on the case of the Block conjoined twins from Germany. They were type 1 vertical craniopagus, which means they were joined at the top of the head facing in the same direction. By this time I had learned a great deal about conjoined twins and decided on a new approach. Since the neurosurgical department at Johns Hopkins is rated number one in the country and because I had so many incredibly talented colleagues, I felt it would be wise to involve as many of them as possible in the attempted separation. Some people were renowned vascular neurosurgeons, while others specialized in tumors and tissue separation and others were very skilled with osseous endeavors. By slotting each team into the operation when we reached the part where their expertise would be most valuable, we were able to proceed rapidly with the separation and in fact were ten hours ahead of schedule when the heart of one of the twins (who had had multiple cardiac problems during anesthetic procedures prior to the operation) stopped.

			Fortunately CPR was successful, but I knew we had to do more to take care of the problem. I was quite concerned about the heart problems of the one twin and suggested that we consider placing a temporary pacemaker before continuing the operation in a couple of days. One of the anesthesiologists involved was quite adamant that we did not need a pacemaker and that that was his area of expertise. The pediatric cardiologists had mixed views about what should be done. Eventually we proceeded with the rest of the separation without a pacemaker. Unfortunately, at the conclusion of the operation the twin with a weak heart once again suffered a cardiac arrest but this time could not be revived. Fortunately the other twin did well, but we were all quite devastated by the loss of our patient.

			In this case I felt quite strongly that a pacemaker should have been placed and that it would have given us a better chance of avoiding tragedy. Afterward I realized that I had too easily yielded to someone who claimed to be a greater authority on the issue. I clearly should have pushed harder for my point of view since the benefit-to-risk ratio would have been favorable for pacemaker versus no pacemaker. By the same token, in situations outside the operating room it is valuable to look at the benefit-to-risk ratio to determine how hard to fight. Of course one needs to be well informed on the issues before making such an analysis, but the rewards can be substantial.

			People are unintentionally bullied all the time by political correctness, which keeps them from saying what they really want to say, because they feel that they will be ostracized and disliked. Everyone likes to feel as though they are a part of the community and appreciated, and that makes them relatively easy to bully into compliance and/or silence. Instead of succumbing to bullies, Americans need to grow backbones, examine their understanding of an issue, and push back if they are sure they are right. Being temporarily unpopular for your political view is a small price to pay for moving our nation back from the brink of disaster.





Our Heritage of Courage


			The American colonialists were quite content with British oversight until that oversight became burdensome with ever-increasing taxes and abuse of power. If the British government’s thirst for the resources of the colonialists had not grown so large, Americans might never have sought independence, but it is the natural tendency of all governments to grow, and they require revenue to do so. Fortunately for America, the rebellion against the English crown was successful and a new era of freedom sprang up on this continent.

			The same thing is happening in America today that happened to the colonialists of old. As our government grows larger and more complex, it will require increasingly larger proportions of the people’s earnings. Also, as the rights of the government increase, the rights of the people decrease. The question is will the American people of today be as courageous and tough as the colonialists were and are they ready for the ultimate push back? Are they ready to stand boldly for those things they believe in without fear of consequences and are they willing to fight with all tools available to them against those who wish to change the nature of the country from people-centric to government-centric?





Dire Consequences of Giving In


			Throughout history many societies have failed to push back and have allowed an overly aggressive government to expand and dominate their lives. Nazi Germany is a perfect example of such a society. One can only wonder what would’ve happened if people had not tolerated the foolishness of Adolf Hitler’s appeal to the baser instincts of greed and envy and his institution of an official weapons confiscation program. He made one group of Germans feel that the success of another group was impeding their own financial progress. He trumped up reasons to confiscate the populace’s weapons to quell any subsequent ideas about resistance. His regime may have started out innocently enough, but because the people did not oppose a progressively overreaching government, the entire world suffered a great Holocaust. Some may say that I’m being overly dramatic in comparing U.S. circumstances with Germany’s state of affairs before pure evil gained the upper hand there, but few people have recognized the precursors of national societal tragedies and even fewer have done anything about them. Bullies do whatever they can get away with and keep pushing the boundaries until they meet resistance. It is the people’s job to stop them before they become uncontrollable.





Push Back Peacefully and Consistently


			Lest anyone get the wrong impression, I am not advocating armed insurrection, but rather just making ourselves aware of what is going on vis-à-vis our freedom. It is ineffective to sit around and complain while the encroachment continues. Instead, concerned citizens should be educating their neighbors, circulating petitions, having community discussions that involve their elected representatives, and using social media to get others involved in the struggle to return power to the people and reduce government’s size and influence. Every activist has a sphere of influence and at the very least can inform friends about voting issues.

			Fighting back against bullies does not always result in immediate victory and, in some cases, you will be soundly defeated. However, bullies like soft targets and if you continue to fight every time they infringe on your rights, you will eventually wear them down and they will look for easier targets. Bullies are cowards, and they will not pick on those who fight back for long.





Win Through Respect


			Standing up to bullies doesn’t always mean fighting them directly. As I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, there is another option: gaining their respect. One of the best examples of this kind of pushing back is about a young female substitute teacher at my high school in Detroit. Substitute teachers were often treated quite roughly, but this teacher, who was very short in stature, commanded classrooms where you could hear a pin drop because even the biggest and toughest guys were afraid of her. She was not a mean person, but she consistently refused to tolerate disrespect and insubordination. She was very warm toward students who behaved themselves. One might say she became the bully, but in fact, she was just taking a strong, principled stand that demanded respect, while at the same time being respectful of others.

			In fighting back against the secular progressives who wish to control our lives with big government, it is important not to emulate their behavior with respect to denigrating their enemies with name-calling and lies. Instead, be calm and courteous and even nice, because as the Bible says in Proverbs 25:21-22, “If your enemies are hungry, give them food to eat. If they are thirsty, give them water to drink. You will heap burning coals on their heads, and the Lord will reward you.” In other words, your enemy will feel much worse if you treat him nicely than if you retaliate. This does not mean that you shouldn’t expose what your enemies are doing and that you shouldn’t have a plan of counterattack that is wise and well thought out.





Know Your Enemy


			A final word on bullies: It is very important to know who your “enemies” are. They are not your average fellow Americans. Don’t mistake neighbors who simply disagree with you for bullies—they are your teammates who happen to have different points of view. Disagree with them, try to educate them, learn from them yourself, but don’t fight them. Instead, push back against the real bullies—those people and influences that wish to fundamentally change America to another type of society. They can belong to any political party and frequently they disguise themselves as great humanitarians. Unless you understand the philosophy of freedom that created our nation and carefully compare new ideas and actions against that philosophy, it becomes very difficult to determine who and what forces are trying to change the nature of our country. Keen observation of current events and diligent study of history and current events is the best way to determine who the enemies of the American Dream are. Once you identify these bullies, you can stand up to them with courage, and they will back down.

			Action Steps

			 				Devise a rational plan to confront a bully in your life.

				Discuss responses to bullying with young people in your sphere of influence.

				Examine your own behavior for bullying. If any behavior could come even close to being considered bullying, determine to stop the behavior for a month and see whether your life improves.

				Based on this chapter, try to identify some media and/ or political bullies and discuss your findings with others.





RESPECTFUL DISAGREEMENT



So discuss the matter with them [your neighbors] privately. Don’t tell anyone else, or others may accuse you of gossip. Then you will never regain your good reputation.

			PROVERBS 25:9-10



Recently I had an opportunity to seek funding for the Carson Scholars Fund from a very large and well-funded foundation. I explained that the purpose of the fund is to honor students from all backgrounds who achieve at the highest academic levels and also care about others, placing them on the same kind of pedestal upon which we place athletic superstars. By receiving recognition, money, a medal, the trophy, and an opportunity to attend an awards ceremony, the students frequently rise from nerd to symbol of excellence in the eyes of their peers, and they inspire other students to work toward academic and humanitarian excellence. The other part of the program concentrates on placing reading rooms all over the country to encourage the love of reading. Special emphasis is placed on Title I schools, where many students come from homes with no books and attend schools with no libraries and are unlikely to otherwise establish a love of reading. The extremely elevated high school dropout rate of these schools hurts not only the students but the well-being of the entire country, and we want to help.

			I told the foundation staff that their support would allow us to dramatically increase the scope of the program, which is currently active in all fifty states. In response, the staff members were very complimentary about the program and the progress that had been made in a relatively short period of time, but they indicated that their priorities were more global and immediate in nature and would not be able to offer any financial assistance to Carson Scholars.

			I feel that the most urgent need in our society is to develop the right kind of leaders for tomorrow, since they will have a tremendous impact not only on the United States but also the world. The foundation staff felt that there were too many problems needing immediate attention and that they could not focus on programs whose effect would be felt in the future. We parted ways cordially and with no hard feelings even though I was disappointed. We both had good intentions but different ideas about priorities. I believe this foundation is composed of good people who expend enormous energy and resources for the good of others and I will continue to have great respect for them regardless of their philosophical priorities.

			Though today’s politicians would have you think otherwise, it is eminently possible to have substantial disagreements with others and remain friendly and cooperative. This is a lesson that must be quickly relearned by American society if we are to be successful going forward. People will always have different ideas about what is important, but those differences should not trump a cordial working relationship.





Pro-Life versus Pro-Choice


			One of the biggest issues dividing Americans today is abortion. Pro-life groups feel that life begins at conception and is very precious and should be protected. They believe that a fetus is a living human being with certain natural rights including life and protection from cruelty. Recent scientific observations have led observers to conclude that a fetus can experience pain as early as ten weeks of gestation. This means that most abortion procedures produce extreme discomfort for the fetus before it dies, making abortion even more abhorrent to pro-life groups. Because of these convictions, some members of pro-life groups oppose abortion under all circumstances, while others believe abortion is wrong but are willing to tolerate abortion in the case of rape, incest, and/or risk to the mother’s life. It is important for the pro-choice groups to understand that the pro-life group is not being mean and obstinate, but truly believes that babies are being slaughtered by people who primarily care about their own convenience.

			On the other hand, the pro-life group needs to understand that the pro-choice group does not really believe that the fetus is a real human being entitled to natural human rights. They are not necessarily being mean or selfish, but rather just have a different understanding of when life begins.

			This is a difficult issue on which to reach compromise, but that should not mean the members of opposing sides demonize each other. I suspect that over the course of time, the age line for abortions will continue to shift depending on political winds and further scientific information regarding fetal existence. The important thing is for both sides to understand the reasoning that forms the foundation for the beliefs of the other side. It is only through attempted empathy that the two sides can work cordially together.





Welfare


			Another contentious issue is whether welfare should be extended to able-bodied adults. In recent years the welfare rolls have rapidly expanded, dramatically adding to the national debt. Those who are in favor of welfare reform tend to claim that people on welfare are lazy and that those who want to continue supporting them are wasteful spendthrifts. Those on the other side tend to call their opponents hard-hearted skinflints who do not care about the poor. The reality is that none of this name-calling is necessary.

			If those on each side of the issue would try to place themselves in the shoes of those with whom they disagree, much of the rancor would dissolve. If you suddenly fell on hard times, it is very likely that you would welcome public assistance, even for an extended period. If, as is true in many cases, you could live better on the welfare system than you could working a low-wage job, what would you do? Certainly if one has small children to care for, elderly parents, or a sick family member, it would make a lot more sense to stay home and accept the public assistance than to try to work. I certainly would not criticize someone who has made such a decision under these circumstances, and it is important for those who are not on public assistance to understand this kind of reasoning.

			On the other hand, if you had been on public assistance for a while and suddenly got off it because you got a low-paying job (or more than one to make ends meet), you probably wouldn’t be overly excited about being forced to support those who are less fortunate. If you are making a good salary, you may be happy to share with the less fortunate, or you might feel taken advantage of by a system that requires more of your resources to support ever-expanding government entitlements. Those on welfare should make an attempt to understand how these people feel as well.





Doctors Versus Patients


			Another example of an issue on which we can respectfully disagree and still work together is tort reform. One of the real drivers of medical costs is the practice of defensive medicine. Many lawyers are happy to bring a lawsuit against a doctor or his practice knowing that they will receive 30 to 40 percent of the award. Eighty to 90 percent of neurosurgical malpractice cases are without merit but that matters little to these lawyers because the majority of cases are settled, since the doctor, the hospital, and the insurance company are not interested in being tied up in a court case for several months. Once the monetary demand drops to an acceptable level, they would rather pay the settlement and move on.

			In order to protect themselves from lawsuits, many doctors order a lot of unnecessary tests and screenings so they can’t be accused of negligence, driving health care costs up. Doctors also purchase extremely expensive insurance to guard themselves against lawsuits, which further inflates what they charge patients. Worst of all, some of the best doctors have quit practicing after enduring unjustified lawsuits, further impoverishing our already broken health care system.

			Those against tort reform argue that we need the lawsuits in order to police the medical industry. They feel that unscrupulous medical professionals would treat patients poorly without the threat of a lawsuit over their heads. Those on the other side of the argument would say that in countries where there is no medical malpractice crisis, the doctors have not abandoned common decency and caring about their patients. Both are reasonable positions, and if the opposing sides would disagree respectfully, they might be able to pass reform similar to that passed in California, which halted a substantial exodus of physicians from the state. Instead, every time tort reform has been introduced to Congress, certain senators have filibustered the issue to death instead of discussing the issue reasonably.





The Rich Versus the Poor


			One of the biggest bones of contention in our nation revolves around the definition of fair taxation. According to some, fair taxation means taking progressively more from the rich and redistributing it to others after the government takes its “fair share.” Others argue that we should reward the wealthy with tax breaks, trusting that the wealth will “trickle down.” I believe there is a third way that becomes evident once you consider the viewpoints of both the rich and the poor.

			I think if a poor person puts herself into the shoes of a rich person, she would feel largely responsible for the well-being of society because her profitable lifestyle has resulted in significant income to sustain the rest of society. If a rich person were put into the shoes of a poor person, he would likely already have a significantly developed work ethic and rather than complaining about having to contribute anything from his meager salary toward societal maintenance, he would be thinking about how to enhance his income and his life. Both would realize that the rich and the poor all have rights and responsibilities in society.

			Considering the views of both the rich and the poor, I would argue that fair taxation means that everyone contributes according to their ability, or in other words, proportionately. I like the idea of proportionality because that was put forth in the Bible in the concept of tithing. All taxpayers were required to give 10 percent of their increase. If they had no increase they had to give nothing, and if they had an extralarge increase, they still only had to provide 10 percent of their increase. This system recognized that the wealthy were not above the law—no tax breaks and no political clout for having given a larger amount. It also recognized that the poor were not “below” the law—as dignified human beings, they had responsibilities to give, even if just a little.

			If our society used this system, a Wall Street mogul who made $10 billion would be required to give $1 billion and a Harlem schoolteacher who made $50,000 would be required to give $5,000. Even though one would give hundreds of times more than the other, they would both have one vote and the same rights and responsibilities before our government. This fits with the American idea that everybody contributes to the overall good of society with the talents he or she brings to the table, no matter how much money each has. Schoolteachers offer much in terms of training the next generation, whereas billionaires offer much in terms of providing resources to maintain infrastructure and so on that benefit everyone.

			Not everyone agrees with this plan. Some feel that it is fair for those with incomes under a certain dollar amount not to pay any federal tax. They say that these people are too poor and it would be a great burden to require them to contribute to the common pot. While I appreciate their compassion, serious problems arise when a person who pays nothing has the right to vote and determine what other people are paying. It does not make sense for me to vote on how much you should give if I don’t have to give anything. In fact, in such a situation it is likely that I would be more than willing to vote to raise your taxes while I simply reap the benefits.

			Unfortunately, redistributionism is a very good strategy for cultivating the favor of large blocks of voters. Under this system, voters will always be loyal to that politician who promises to keep taxes low or nonexistent while taking from the “evil rich” to support the government. Voters with lower incomes will always have the incentive to vote for higher taxes on the wealthy, and that system would result in a smaller and smaller tax base supporting an increasingly large financial burden.

			As soon as you introduce a graduated income tax as opposed to a proportional income tax, you also introduce your own biases. Although it sounds magnanimous to say the rich should bear virtually all of the tax burden and the poor should not have their lives complicated by paying any taxes, this is actually quite demeaning to the poor and is basically saying to them, “You poor little thing, don’t you worry because I will take care of you since you can’t take care of yourself.” Robbing people of dignity by making them feel like freeloaders is not compassionate, but it can be quite effective in assuaging the guilt of some of the economically well-off individuals in our society.

			Not only is this kind of taxation both divisive and unsustainable, it is especially offensive to individuals like me who have worked extremely hard throughout life to achieve success and who give away enormous amounts of money to benefit others. This system unfairly assumes that people like me are only greedy and uncaring. Wealthy people in the United States have created more charitable organizations and been more philanthropic than any other group in the world. We should celebrate their achievements rather than envy them.

			Sure, some wealthy people are selfish because they are human beings subject to the same imperfections as everyone else. Fortunately, even these people have to give back to society; they need house cleaners, pilots, gardeners, chauffeurs, cooks, and a host of other people to maintain their lifestyle. Even if they don’t have a charitable bone in their body, they still provide employment for others. We are more likely to get such individuals to begin thinking of others if we treat them fairly rather than if we demonize them, just as the poor are more likely to want compromise if we don’t assume they are all lazy and undeserving of help.





The Importance of Humility and a Listening Ear


			There are many more contentious issues that divide the American people, but all of them should be subjected to open civil discussions in which each side tries to look at the issue from the perspective of the other. This can only be done if each party is willing to exhibit some humility. That means being willing to let someone else be right sometimes and being willing to listen.

			I was recently on a national talk show in which I represented one side of a particular argument and a congresswoman represented the other side. She was so intent on demonstrating the superiority of her position that she repeatedly rudely interrupted while I was speaking without even realizing that we were largely in agreement. I can certainly identify with this attitude, because I held an extreme version of it as an adolescent in Detroit. I arrogantly thought that I knew more than others and I frequently would not even entertain their views. I often found myself in trouble, because I would become angry and react in a violent or other aggressive manner, in one case almost killing a classmate with a knife.

			I had been minding my own business when a classmate came along and began to ridicule me. I had a large camping knife in my hand and without thinking, I lunged at him, plunging the knife into his abdomen. He backed off, certain that he had been mortally wounded before discovering that the knife blade had struck a large metal belt buckle under his clothing and broken. He fled in terror but I was even more terrified when realizing that I had almost killed someone. That incident led me to prayerfully consider my plight and to ask for God’s guidance and help. I came to understand that very day that I was always angry because I was selfish. I felt that someone was always infringing on my rights, getting in my space, messing with my things, disregarding my positions, and so on, which offended me, leading to inappropriate behavior. Through wisdom provided by God it dawned on me that I should step outside of the center of the circle so that everything wasn’t always about me. I learned to consider the viewpoint of others and it dramatically altered my behavior. Most people who know me today cannot believe that I was ever plagued by a violent temper. Proverbs 16:32 says, “It is better to be patient than powerful; it is better to have self-control than to conquer a city.” Anyone can act irrationally, but it takes a wise and truly strong individual to remain controlled, logical, and willing to truly hear what the other person is saying.





Strategies for Cordial Disagreement


			Compromise is most likely when both parties respect each other no matter how much they disagree. In stressful situations where you need a consensus, respect sometimes means saying nothing and refraining from name-calling even when irritated. By doing so, you not only manifest respect for others but for yourself as well. The best way to respond to distracting personal attacks is to practice bringing the conversation back to the issue at hand. Never fall into the trap of engaging in personal attacks while letting the topic of conversation slip into the background. Doing so allows your opponent to escape the need to explain her position. If she has a good argument, she would be eager to pursue it rather than trying to change the subject to you and your character.

			When seeking respectful dialogue, another good tactic is to focus on the big picture and de-emphasize small details. I liken the silly arguments that some people engage in to a passenger ship that is about to go over Niagara Falls while the passengers and crew are arguing about the barnacles on the side of the ship. They continue a discourse that could have some value down the road, but they fail to adjust the course of the ship and everyone perishes, rendering the barnacle issue completely irrelevant. Don’t lose sight of the issue at hand.

			I have found that the best way to proceed with civil discussions about issues on which people disagree is to first concur on what is important to both parties. Next determine who is harmed by each position and agree not to intentionally harm others. Last, exhibit tolerance without discarding core values.

			The Second Amendment debate is a good illustration of this process. Some people feel that there should be no restrictions on the rights of citizens to have any kind of weapon they choose. They firmly believe that the Second Amendment was established to allow citizens to protect themselves from foreign or domestic threats including an out-of-control central government. They do not believe it reasonable for such a government to hold all of the powerful weapons, while they are left with only hunting rifles.

			The other side dismisses such arguments as paranoia and believes in stringent gun control and restrictions on the types of weapons and amount of ammunition individuals can possess. They believe that we could quell the epidemic of mass murders by keeping dangerous weapons out of the hands of unstable individuals.

			Both sides can agree that we do not want dangerous weapons in the hands of unstable individuals and this should be the starting point of any conversation. The first group would probably agree that freedom is the most important thing, while the second group might feel that safety is the most important thing. Their discussion should center around how to preserve Second Amendment freedom while ensuring safety for the largest number of citizens. During those discussions both should agree to hold personal freedom and societal safety as their targets. Nothing should be done to intentionally affect those two things in a negative way. This is a civilized way to have a productive discussion and is the first step toward finding compromise.

			Recall that I love to say, “If two people agree about everything, one of them isn’t necessary.” Disagreement is part of being a person who has choices. One of those choices is to respect others and engage in intelligent conversation about differences of opinion without becoming enemies, eventually allowing us to move forward to compromise. “A house divided against itself cannot stand,” and a nation that tears itself apart will not survive.

			Action Steps

			 				Take the first step and offer to put your differences aside with someone you frequently argue with. Refuse to argue with them for at least one month.

				If engaged in a pointless argument, change the subject to something about which there is agreement.

				Try to conceive of a plan that might work for both sides when you see the next political argument on television.

				Try listening twice as much as talking since you have two ears and only one mouth.





THE ART OF COMPROMISE



Without wise leadership, a nation falls; with many counselors, there is safety.

			PROVERBS 11:14



Although we had very little money, my mother would save every penny over several years in order to be able to purchase a new car when the old one she was driving was on its last leg. She did not believe in buying used cars, because she felt that the previous owner probably would not have gotten rid of it if it was functioning optimally.

			Once when I was a teenager I went with her to look at a car. It was a beautiful vehicle, yellow with black interior and a black vinyl top. I was quite excited, because I had recently acquired my driver’s license and was already starting to imagine myself cruising down the streets of Detroit in a brand-new automobile. The problem was that the car was several hundred dollars more expensive than the cash she had on hand.

			My mother could bargain with the best of people, and after a couple of hours had worn the salesman down to the point that he was ready to make a deal after she showed him the cash. I was absolutely jubilant until I heard several days later that the salesman had lost his job for giving my mother too sweet a deal. I’m certain that if my mother had had more money, she would have been willing to compromise, but she believed in only paying cash for cars and would not qualify for a loan anyway. As a matter of principle, she did not believe in borrowing money to pay for anything other than a house, because she had seen too many people ruin their lives with financial overreach.

			Many people feel that driving a hard bargain is a sign of strength and perseverance, and in many cases they are correct. However, my mother and I learned the hard way that it is not always the kindest thing to do. My mother certainly did not intend to get the man fired and offered to give the car back, but for some reason, since the deal had already been consummated, that was not possible. While my mother was pleased she had been able to buy the car, she wished she had not pressed so hard. Sometimes compromise is the best way to go, even when you think you could get your own way without it.

			Many people have recently commented on how difficult it is to get anything accomplished in Washington anymore. The art of compromise appears to be vanishing with both political parties adopting a “my way or the highway” attitude. In much of the legislation that has been passed in the last few years, one side is pleased and the other side is disgruntled. This is an acceptable outcome, as long as each side is civil and works honestly with the other. Unfortunately today, both parties seem to be content with gridlock if they can’t get what they want and have stopped giving ground in order to be a part of an important solution. Rather than sulking, they should be seeking compromise in every possible way. For that to happen, both sides must have some incentive to move through respectful disagreement to produce an actual agreement.





Timing Is Everything


			I remember as a child in Boston going to Haymarket Square on Saturday evenings with my mother and my aunt and uncle, as well as my brother. This was the weekly trip to buy produce and I always found it exciting, especially during the closing hour when the farmers were ready to go home and wanted desperately to avoid carrying unsold produce back home. The same sellers who a couple of hours earlier were disinclined to sell five tomatoes for a dollar were now willing to give away a dozen tomatoes for the same price. You might say they were highly incentivized to make a deal.

			In the same way, situations change for legislators and it is good to revisit issues periodically where no compromise was possible earlier. A good example of this is the fierce opposition to Medicare when it was first introduced. While some lawmakers refused it initially, it soon became apparent that there were no other good alternatives being offered, and the need for the program grew as our population began showing significant signs of aging. Over time, the incentive for compromising grew, the opposition waned, and the program was accepted by both legislative bodies.





Starting Small


			When I was a freshman in high school, my Latin class had to break up into teams and complete a complex project depicting some important facet of the Roman Empire. I was paired with a couple of people who had always been my academic competitors and with whom I did not get along particularly well. Despite our dislike for one another, we got to work and decided to create a replica of the Roman Colosseum. We experimented with all types of ingredients and finally decided to construct walls with dough, clay, and sand. We used wire and popsicle sticks for scaffolding, and really tested our artistic talents in the creation of people and ferocious animals to populate a structure that was rather magnificent, if I do say so myself. In the process of doing the research and figuring out how to make our project structurally sound and aesthetically pleasing, we began to realize that we liked one another and started to associate as friends as much as project mates.

			I believe the same thing could happen in Washington with our legislators if they put aside their differences and worked together in a systematic fashion to solve a problem. Perhaps they could start with a small issue and work their way up gradually to large and very meaningful problems. I believe they would discover in working together that they are not nearly as different from one another as they had previously thought.





Recent Examples of Compromise


			Interestingly enough, there already have been a number of such projects, and the records are available for our study. We have the opportunity to see what kind of people have been representing us, and whether they are interested in serving the needs of the populace or whether they are more closely tied to the special interest groups that continue to fund their reelection. We have all the ammunition we need to make important decisions about our nation’s direction.

			In our recent history, there have been some notable events that brought both parties together with an amazing show of unity and success. The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait led to a bipartisan determination to expel Saddam Hussein and his army from the land of the peace-loving people of Kuwait. Even more unity was demonstrated after our nation was attacked by radical Islamic elements on September 11, 2001. People were able to look at the big picture in these situations and quickly establish common goals that were reached through cooperative efforts. In the latter case a second war ensued that probably was not necessary, but there was bipartisan agreement on its initiation, although bitter partisan battles over the war effort later broke out.

			During the Clinton administration there was significant rancor between the two parties over efforts to reform social welfare programs. Both sides made significant concessions and successfully improved the program while decreasing the welfare rolls. At the beginning of the welfare fight, both sides were entrenched and it appeared that no progress would be made, but President Clinton exercised real leadership by sitting down with Speaker Gingrich and discussing how to make changes that would make the program affordable while still helping those individuals who were truly in need. These kinds of cooperative efforts actually led to a budgetary surplus for the first time in many years. There is absolutely no reason why the same type of success cannot be achieved today if the two sides were willing to look at the big picture and put aside pride in order to solve problems, with no one achieving total victory and no one suffering total defeat.





Gay Marriage


			One large issue that is ripe for compromise is the issue of gay marriage. I liken the gay marriage argument to a new group of mathematicians who claim that 2 + 2 = 5. The traditional mathematicians say that 2 + 2 = 4 and always has been, and always will be 4. The new mathematicians continue to insist on their version of mathematics so the traditional mathematicians eventually relent and say, “For you guys, 2 + 2 = 5, but for us it will continue to be 4.” The new mathematicians are not satisfied with that compromise and say that 2 + 2 must also be 5 for you and everyone else and if you won’t accept that then you are a “mathist” (as opposed to a racist, sexist, or some other kind of “ist”) or mathophobe. The two sides will most likely never reach an agreement as to the actual equation. If, however, they discuss the matter rationally without demanding that political correctness silence the other’s opinions, they may move through respectful disagreement to practical compromises that are acceptable to both sides.

			I firmly believe that marriage is between a man and a woman. However, I see no reason why any two consenting adults, regardless of their sexual orientation, cannot be joined together in a legally binding civil relationship that provides hospital visitation rights, property rights, and so on without tampering with the definition of marriage. This would give the gay population what they want, while leaving the traditional definition of marriage intact. This is what compromise is about. The “my way or the highway” mentality on either side of the argument only leads to gridlock and animosity. This is a practical way to apply common sense to a complex social issue.





National Debt


			Another issue where compromise is badly needed is rapidly accumulating debt. The Democrats, led by the president, appear to be relatively unconcerned about the debt and are happy to continue spending, borrowing, and expanding entitlements. The Republicans, on the other hand, are extremely concerned that we will eventually have to pay the piper if we continue to expand our national debt, and that we will burden future generations with financial obligations that will extinguish the American Dream. One side is concerned about preserving entitlements and the other is concerned about preserving our nation’s future.

			A little wisdom and some review of the actual facts would be useful in the pursuit of joint solutions. We have a $17 trillion national debt that continues to grow. We have ever-expanding entitlement programs that are extremely expensive. Small businesses are frightened of government and its plans to implement a health care system that will be expensive and intrusive. This also includes its many enforcement provisions that will be overseen by the discredited IRS, which at the time of this writing is under investigation for illegal activity. Big businesses have trillions of dollars sitting on the sidelines waiting for a friendlier business environment before investing. None of us, regardless of our political philosophy, can possibly be content with such a situation. The injection of a little common sense into the discussions would prove beneficial.

			As far as the growing debt is concerned, it should be treated the same way that personal debt is treated by thinking and pragmatic families. First they assess their income and output. If the output is greater than the income, they either decrease the output, find a way to increase the income, or both. If after several months their deficit spending continues, they realize that their plan is not working and honestly reappraise and adjust it accordingly. The last thing they do is double down on an ineffective plan while sticking their head in the sand. An unwise family in this situation, however, would continue on, while stating emphatically that they were not spending as much as they had been and that eventually the budget would come under control. They would claim that it would be too painful to significantly cut down on the spending and that anyone requesting such action is obviously heartless. They would also talk about growing their income, but would not change what they were doing to make that a reality. When they saw that things were not working out according to their predictions, they would never consider that they were following an inappropriate course of action, but instead would blame others for impeding them.

			There’s no question that our government needs to cut wasteful spending. Obviously the cutting should occur in areas of duplication of services, extravagant entertainment for government officials, fraud, unnecessary programs, and so on. In the recent sequestration efforts, the current administration intentionally targeted cuts that would be felt acutely by the public who would then agree that making any cuts was too painful. Included in these cuts was elimination of White House tours for ordinary citizens. This is something that many school groups plan for years and it is not too expensive. Additionally, in light of this particular cut, many individuals and groups volunteered to provide the funds necessary to keep the White House tours open, but such offers were refused. Another cut was in TSA (Transportation Security Administration) personnel to make the experience at the airport even more painful for travelers. I personally find these tactics extraordinarily insulting to the populace’s intelligence, most of whom can easily see through this gamesmanship. The sad thing is that there are large numbers of people in American society today who are fooled by these infantile tactics and don’t question anything, as long as they get their government support.

			Much more important, however, than cutting money from the budget, is expanding the economy with resultant significant income to the government. We do not have to reinvent the wheel to accomplish this. We simply need to create a friendly environment for business and entrepreneurship and stop trying to regulate the lives of responsible American citizens. These were principles that were followed (early in American history) during the rapid expansion of business and industry throughout our nation, which rapidly propelled us to the pinnacle of the world economically.

			First of all, we need to recognize that the United States has the highest corporate tax rates in the world. Our rates even exceed those of openly socialist countries. A few years ago Canada and several other countries significantly slashed their corporate rates, which had the desired effect of attracting American business. Our American leadership has talked about cutting corporate tax rates, but nothing has been done. We are capable of moving very quickly in a crisis, such as 9/11, but extreme lethargy characterizes our usual pace of governmental progress. This is an issue that should not be controversial for those who are socialists in our Congress.

			More controversial, however, is the issue of cutting tax rates for individuals and small businesses. The Democrats feel that those with very high incomes should pay most of the taxes since they can afford to do so. The Republicans feel that enabling people to keep the vast majority of what they earn is more conducive to growth and encourages people to work hard. Again, a little common sense goes a long way. Taxation needs to be fair for everyone and not just for a favored group. This is the reason I like the tithing model set forth in the Bible, as I mentioned earlier. As soon as you depart from a proportional taxation system, you introduce ideological bias, making arguments endless. Also, everyone must have skin in the game when it comes to taxation. People with a lot of money have a large amount of skin in the game and people with very little money only have a small amount, but everybody is taxed proportionately, which makes it fair.

			Unfairness is introduced when the tax code is riddled with loopholes that are accessible to some but irrelevant for others. Those with good tax lawyers and accountants can substantially reduce the taxes they pay, which is grossly unfair to those unable to take advantage of such things. Lowering tax rates and eliminating loopholes at the same time is a no-brainer that has been advocated by both Republicans and Democrats, but once again nothing is done. Even with the loopholes, the top 10 percent of the populace in terms of income pay 70 percent of the income taxes while earning 46 percent of the taxable income, which means they are indeed paying more than their fair share.

			The Simpson-Bowles commission, which was a bipartisan congressional group, laid out the rationale for cutting taxes and eliminating loopholes quite cogently and in a way that provided a victory for both sides, but the recommendations were rejected by the executive branch of government and by members of Congress from both sides. This is a good example of the “my way or the highway” philosophy that runs rampant in Washington today. Ideology generally does not yield to logic and common sense. Because the Simpson-Bowles plan and other plans like it significantly reduced government spending and thus government growth, those politicians who feel that government is the solution to every problem and want to massively expand the government’s reach into every aspect of our lives could not possibly agree with a reasoned approach to getting our deficit under control and growing the economy. At the same time, those who want to rapidly reduce the federal debt and shrink government might be noble in their goals, but must be patient and gradually accomplish their objectives, because a rapid reduction in the size of government could create significant unemployment and other logistical problems that could be avoided with some compromise.





The Problem of Pride


			In the Bible, in the Book of Proverbs we are told that God hates pride and arrogance. These are the very characteristics that surround the ideologues on both sides who feel that their way is the only right way. How many wonderful relationships never developed because each of the two parties was too proud to make the first move? How many wonderful marriages were ruined because pride erased the words “I’m sorry” from a couple’s vocabularies? I vividly remember a case where a couple lost their home to foreclosure because they refused to accept a bid from a buyer that was lower than their asking price. Pride is the quickest compromise killer.

			When this kind of silliness is not only present but abounds in our congressional and executive halls, how can we ever expect to make progress? The answer to this problem is simple. It is found in the Bible, again in the Book of Proverbs where chapter 22, verse 4 says, “True humility and fear of the Lord lead to riches, honor, and long life.” Humility doesn’t mean that you can’t have an opinion or advocate a position, but it does mean you are willing to consider the opinions and positions of others in a serious way and then move forward to a meaningful compromise. If the politicians can just drop some of the hubris and once again serve humbly for the good of the people, solutions will rapidly follow. We the people must make ourselves aware of whom the politicians are who totally disregard our welfare and cast their votes in their own interests. Those people need to be thrown out of office on a wholesale basis regardless of their party affiliation.

			Action Steps

			 				Try to identify some national politicians who are humble.

				Identify your principles that can’t be compromised. Then consider what ideas used to implement those principles could be compromised.

				Make the first step toward compromise of an idea that has put you at odds with someone you know.

				Examine your own attitude for arrogance. When you identify an area of pride, practice gratitude for what you have been given. Recognize your own fallibility.





BECOMING INFORMED



Only simpletons believe everything they are told! The prudent carefully consider their steps.

			PROVERBS 14:15



When I was young, I thought classical music was only the background noise for cartoons, so when my brother Curtis returned from one of his stints in the navy with an album titled The Unfinished Symphony of Franz Schubert, I was quite astonished. This was a strange choice for someone who had grown up in Detroit, also known as Motown. In Detroit “classical” music was produced by the likes of Stevie Wonder, the Supremes, the Temptations, the Four Tops, Gladys Knight, Martha and the Vandellas, and the Jackson Five.

			Nevertheless, I listened to the Unfinished Symphony, and it appealed to me. I was interested in learning more about classical music because they frequently asked questions on my favorite television program, GE College Bowl, about different classical composers and their creations. Inspired by Curtis, I purchased a record album of Rossini overtures that included the theme from the Lone Ranger. I played that record every day until I could name each overture and became immensely fond of this music, which led me to begin listening to classical music stations and making classical music a big part of my life. I’m glad I cultivated the interest, since classical music affected my life in many ways and, most important, created some wonderful friendships, including a lasting relationship with a young Yale student by the name of Candy Rustin, a classical violinist who is now my wife of thirty-eight years.

			Many people criticized me and thought that I was weird because of my love of classical music, but if I had listened to them and remained in the ideological box they created for themselves, I would not have expanded my horizons in a way that turned out to be positive for me. Today I frequently find myself reminding young people to expand their horizons of knowledge and not listen to those who tell them to limit their interests to things that are “culturally relevant.” I tell them that if you want to be relevant only in your household, then you only need to know the things that are important in your house, and if you want to be relevant in your neighborhood, you need to know what’s important in your neighborhood. The same thing applies to your city, state, and country. And if you want to be relevant to the entire world, program that computer known as your brain with all kinds of information from everywhere in order to prepare yourself.

			Someone might say, “Don’t learn all that stuff because you will overload your brain.” As a neuroscientist I can tell you unequivocally that it is impossible to overload the human brain with information. If you learn one new fact every second, which is virtually impossible, it will take you approximately three million years to approach brain overload. The human brain has billions of neurons and hundreds of billions of interconnections. It can process more than two million bits of information per second and can remember everything you have ever seen or heard.

			All of this information is retained indefinitely. I could take an eighty-five-year-old man and place depth electrodes into a certain part of his brain followed by appropriate electrical stimulation and he would be able to recite back verbatim a book he had read sixty years ago. Most of us can’t retrieve the information our brain stores that easily, but surely we can improve.

			Many people comment on what percentage of the brain we actually use, but no one knows the actual number. We do, however, know of many accounts of individuals who have done unbelievable things when it was a matter of survival. That alone tells us that we generally operate significantly below capacity and that we can always learn more.





Education as the Foundation of Our Government


			The founders of our nation understood that such a society could not long exist without a well-informed and well-educated populace who used the amazing brains God gave them. Even people with only a grade school education in America in the 1800s were extremely well educated. That education in turn allowed them to make informed decisions in the voting booth, protecting them against tyranny.

			There are many sinister forces that are vying for power in our American society. Most of these are associated with politically ambitious individuals who are far more concerned about power and prestige than they are about the people’s welfare. Uninformed citizens tend to be trusting of some of these forces without doing due diligence in terms of studying their previous performance or their associations with dubious characters. An uninformed voter, for instance, might ignore the fact that their favorite candidate had a long history of associating with radical elements, because the candidate proclaims his good intentions and promises them justice. A well-informed voter who favored the same candidate might engage in further investigation on his own, discover that the candidate represented an organization found to be engaged in illegal practices, and change his vote as a result of the discovery.

			Congress today has less than a 10 percent approval rating, yet its members are reelected 90 percent of the time across the nation. This means they have been successful in fooling the voters, but it does not mean that this should or will continue. Until the laws of this country are changed, we the people still have the ability to select our representatives. This is not only a right, but a responsibility, and we can only exercise that right responsibly when we are well informed.





Know the Record, Not Just the Party


			To be informed voters, Americans need to learn to look beyond party affiliation. A significant number of voters enter the voting booth looking for a name they recognize or a party affiliation and they cast their vote based on these superficial factors. Honest politicians should be uncomfortable cultivating these types of voters. Dishonest politicians actively try to encourage such voters to support them by offering promises of jobs, free or low-cost health care, easy access to citizenship for aliens, free equipment such as telephones, and government aid to purchase food and other necessities. These bribes are extraordinarily appealing to people who feel disempowered, yet entitled. The politicians know that all of these promises will not be fulfilled or will only be fulfilled temporarily before money runs out, but they don’t really care as long as they are voted into power. The poor voters in many cases are too stressed to even notice the poor performance of their representatives and eagerly listen while those same representatives shower them with even more empty promises.

			Unfortunately, many Americans don’t even know who their representatives are, nor are they aware of their voting record or general philosophy about life in our nation. Because the world is so interconnected, a well-informed individual cannot be an isolationist. They clearly must be aware of what is happening in the rest of the world and should be able to articulate opinions on major subjects of interest at any time. This way, they will be able to tell whether their opinions are in sync with those of their state and congressional representatives.

			All of this is to say that we as Americans should vigorously pursue knowledge of history, current events, science and technology, finance, geography, philosophy, and religion—actually, anything and everything. Cultivating wide-ranging curiosity and careful study will provide the background we need to correctly analyze the words uttered by politicians and people in the media.





Don’t Replace Your Brain with a Computer


			I’ve heard it argued that a broad base of knowledge is not nearly as important as it used to be, because most people have smartphones and can instantly access the Internet. While it may be a waste of time to memorize certain types of information since we all have virtual encyclopedias in our pockets, there is no substitute for an ingrained broad base of knowledge. That built-in knowledge allows a person to immediately assess the veracity of something they are hearing for the first time rather than just swallowing it hook, line, and sinker. While we may be able to look up answers to many questions, the study of psychology has demonstrated that what we already know influences the way we process new information. For instance, if we know there is a rabid dog loose in our neighborhood, we will regard any stray dog with a great deal of caution and suspicion, whereas if we are notified that a valuable prize-winning dog is lost in our neighborhood with a big reward out for its return, we are likely to regard that stray dog differently. Having a good knowledge base rather than relying on the ability to look everything up on Google definitely affects our instant analysis of new information on an everyday basis.





Dangers of Ignorance


			Unfortunately, uninformed citizens frequently are the most vociferous in voicing their opinions. They cannot back up those opinions with facts but often are not interested in listening to common sense that opposes their beliefs. I remember a young man, very popular during late middle school and early high school years, who provides a vivid example of this behavior and its consequences. He had a following and clearly was the leader of the pack. He also was quick to voice his opinions about almost everything and was overly impressed with his own physical abilities. One unfortunate summer day, he was bragging about his swimming abilities and when challenged, was determined to demonstrate that his detractors were wrong. On a dare, he attempted to swim to one of the pillars holding up a large bridge and then swim back to shore. Unfortunately, he was caught in the undertow of the river and drowned. His tragic death illustrates what can happen when one pursues goals without appropriate information. One may think that a river looks like a gigantic swimming pool, but a little investigation should lead one to the understanding that there are many forces in a river that are not found in a swimming pool.

			While a lack of education can lead to hasty action, it can also lead to lethal inaction. During the last presidential election in America, tens of millions of eligible voters simply did not vote. Many have become frustrated with the whole political scene and do not want to participate, while many others feel that the elections are fixed and/or their vote would not count anyway for a variety of reasons. I cannot emphasize strongly enough to such individuals that your failure to become informed and vote accordingly only exacerbates the situation. If only those completely swayed by the promises of demagogues vote, we will soon be in trouble far deeper than what we have already experienced.





What an Educated Citizen Knows


			Becoming an informed citizen not only makes you a wiser voter but can enhance all of life’s experiences, from planning a career to raising a family. Time and space won’t allow me to provide an exhaustive outline of the things informed citizens should know, but here are a few of the basics:

			 				Basic world and American history

				Basic world and American geography

				Basic household economics (key principles like balancing a checkbook and knowing that you do not buy a house that costs more than two and a half times your annual income could have spared many Americans a lot of trouble before the housing crisis)

				Basic understanding of how credit works and how debt accumulates

				Names of state and national representatives

				Basic nutrition and disease management

				Traffic rules for pedestrians and vehicle operators

				Basic math including the calculation of percentages

				The ability to read at an eighth-grade level



			You may be surprised at the elementary nature of some items on this list, but a surprising number of adult Americans are lacking in these areas despite being well versed in the minor characters of popular sitcoms. Obviously there are a host of other things that would be useful to know, but I’ve deliberately chosen this list, since anyone who is honest and informed at the basic levels described above will be a formidable individual who is difficult to manipulate and would be a prized supporter for any honest political candidate.





Education Is the Door to Prosperity


			It is especially imperative that we emphasize to members of oppressed communities that education affects your entire life. There are many studies available to show vast lifetime economic differences between those with a high school diploma versus a college degree versus a professional degree. (Education in highly skilled trades also pays off very well economically.) The first twenty to twenty-five years are spent either preparing yourself educationally or not preparing yourself. If you prepare well, you will have sixty years to reap the benefits. If you prepare poorly, you will have sixty years to suffer the consequences. When you look at it that way, a little investment in hard work for a relatively short period of time pays huge dividends, while failure to prepare is equivalent to choosing to be a victim of society. We must get our young people to understand that they are the ones who get to make the choice about the lifestyle they will lead. As long as they remain free of legal entanglements, no one can stop them from pursuing their dreams. My life is a testament to this.

			Education also opens many doors of personal fulfillment and joy that have nothing to do with economics. I believe it would be highly instructive and beneficial to many of the young people in our nation to live abroad in a third world nation for several months and then return to the United States. Like many immigrants who come here, I believe they would immediately realize how many opportunities they have and how many choices are theirs for the taking.





It’s Never Too Late to Learn


			The basic elements necessary to become an informed citizen are readily available in the public school systems, but unfortunately some people do not pay attention in school, and 30 percent of those who enter U.S. high schools do not graduate. Fortunately, all hope is not lost for such individuals, because there are many ways that one can acquire the basic knowledge listed in the bullet points above. Information on those topics can be found for free online, though it’s important to choose reputable sources. Many things posted on the Internet are simply opinions presented as facts and it is important to cross-reference information several times before accepting them.

			Television and radio programs can provide much information on current events, but since there is so much bias in the media, it is important to listen to several sources representing both sides of an issue in order to be informed. Listening only to one cable news outlet is probably not wise if you want to learn about all sides of an issue. The same is true of printed media. I recently had dinner with two senior editors of a major national newspaper and I asked them if they were unbiased. They both proclaimed that they were objective and saw no bias in their reporting, despite clearly partisan leanings in their paper. To avoid absorbing a biased point of view, make sure you vary your media sources.

			Perhaps the best source of information are books from reputable publishers. As a boy I made extensive use of the public library, where I could access thousands of books for free. Even such books can give a slanted view, making it wise for the reader to read many books. One way to find out what books are fair and accurate is to ask librarians. In most cases they don’t mind being references even if you are not checking out a book from their library. It is also a good idea, when trying to decide how reputable a particular publisher is, to determine the number of books they have in the section of the library that you are interested in. There are numerous small, upstart publishing houses that make claims that cannot be substantiated about the quality of their publications, but if you see their name on numerous titles, it is likely that they are quite reputable and that they engage in due diligence before publishing any work.





Don’t Be Fooled


			People who try to manipulate public opinion are much more effective when they appear to present new information to people who should have already known the subject matter. They also like to make accusations against their enemies, repeating them loudly and often with the hope that people will begin to believe them. They know that even though they frequently need to retract these accusations, they can print retractions weeks later on the bottom of page 23 of the newspaper where it is unlikely to be noticed.

			In addition, the manipulators in the media intentionally ignore or downplay transgressions and prevarications on behalf of the people they agree with while making an enormous fanfare about any imperfections found in their perceived enemies. The media hated George W. Bush and made a big deal about the victory pose he assumed during the Iraqi war on the deck of a battleship with a sign behind him declaring, “Mission Accomplished.” Of course that war went on for several more years with many casualties and enormous expenditures of taxpayer dollars. The same media has largely ignored the fact that Barack Obama stated that with the death of Osama bin Laden and the drone strikes of several other Al Qaeda leaders that we were winning the war and our enemies were on the run. If anything, Al Qaeda is becoming stronger with many people vying for the leadership role. Also, the same media that portrayed Watergate as the scandal of the century sat quietly by as the current administration proclaimed the IRS harassment of the administration’s enemies “a phony scandal.” By not focusing on the “fast and furious” scandal, the Benghazi debacle, the IRS scandal, the government surveillance revelations, and so on, the hope is that the public will simply forget about these horrendous shortcomings and move on. This will work only if American voters remain uneducated.





What Does a Good Education Look Like?


			I recently visited the College of the Ozarks in Branson, Missouri. Like Berea College in Kentucky, they require all students to work at least fifteen hours per week. Their nickname, Hard Work University, is well earned. They are a Christian college that is both true to its convictions and selective—they only accept one out of ten applicants. They are definitely not politically correct and place strong emphasis on the founding principles of our nation and on Christian doctrine. The students, faculty, and administrators are the most courteous and friendly people you could ever hope to meet. One might say these students are being indoctrinated the right way. They are taught fiscal responsibility and all graduate with no debt.

			If we don’t start following the College of the Ozarks’ example of teaching our young people about the values and principles that made our nation great, those values and principles will be replaced by something else that is unlikely to be inspiring and elevating. We have to be just as proactive as the secular progressives who have put us in the position we are in now and have been over the last few decades. We must not be ashamed of who we are or what we believe, in fact we should be extremely proud of our historical accomplishments. There is no room for gloating, but we must remember that if we don’t put appropriate facts and people before our young people, someone else will substitute their version of Utopia.

			To be successful we must take politics out of education and concentrate on empowering the entire American populace. This is the only way that the people’s will can be ensured so that we can have the kind of nation that was envisioned by our founders. We must take advantage of all the educational tools available to return us to a place where our public education system is the envy of the world. The rapid development of virtual classrooms and smart computers that are able tutors can be a godsend that will be well worth the cost, enabling us to be serious about our obligation to educate people. Part of that education includes preparing people for jobs of the future, which will decrease unemployment and increase fulfillment while brightening future generations’ prospects. Last, we should shine the bright light of truth on the forces of manipulation that run rampant throughout our society today. Improvements in education, combined with wisdom and knowledge, would then turn our country around.

			Action Steps

			 				Challenge yourself to learn a new fact about American history each day for one month.

				Resolve to replace television and Internet surfing with reading for a month.

				Learn the names of your state and federal government representatives and research their voting records.

				Cross-reference each use of statistics in a news report to determine whether the reporter is spinning the facts.





WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE



How much better to get wisdom than gold, and understanding than silver!

			PROVERBS 16:16



When I was in medical school, a prized possession was a copy of the last year’s examination in the various courses. Many students would memorize the questions and answers from previous years and feel that they had a significant advantage at exam time only to discover that they answered incorrectly on numerous occasions. They were culling the old exams for knowledge, but not using wisdom in the process.

			Wise persons would understand that the professors knew that students would acquire old exams and try to remember the correct answers. They would also realize that professors tend to be smart people and would likely slip in something that would change the question ever so slightly, requiring a different answer. The wise students really didn’t care very much about the previous year’s answer, but spent a lot of time analyzing the question to determine what body of knowledge they would need to correctly answer such a question. They would then make sure that they had a thorough understanding of that body of information, recognizing that it is important and would be tested for again. Needless to say, those students tended to do very well. Without a doubt, students who did poorly were very knowledgeable and generally had been high achievers throughout their lives, but they were looking for a quick solution without fully understanding and dissecting the questions.





Not Just the Facts


			Many people use the terms wisdom and knowledge interchangeably. They are, however, quite different, and having one in no way confers the other. Knowledge is familiarity with facts. The more knowledge one has, the more things one is capable of doing, but only with wisdom is one able to discern which of the many things they are capable of doing should be pursued and in what order.

			Wisdom is essentially the same thing as common sense, the slight difference is that common sense provides the ability to react appropriately, while wisdom is frequently more proactive and additionally encourages the shaping of the environment. As such, wisdom is the most important commodity for anyone who is planning to be successful in any endeavor.

			Solomon, the son of King David in the Bible, is considered by many to be the wisest man who ever lived. His wisdom led to great wealth and renown. Many will remember that his first challenge as king of Israel was to determine what to do in the case of two women who came before him, both claiming to be the mother of the same baby. Had he based his decision on knowledge alone, King Solomon would have focused on the women’s testimony by interrogating them. Instead, after hearing all the arguments, King Solomon declared that a swordsman should split the baby and give half to each woman. One of the women thought that was a fair solution and the other was horrified and immediately relinquished her claim on the baby. In his wisdom, he used his knowledge that the real mother would truly love the baby and prefer to give it to the other woman rather than killing it.

			You’ve probably noticed that I frequently quote Solomon, the writer of the Book of Proverbs in the Bible. Since the day that I tried to stab another teenager, I have started and ended each day reading from the Book of Proverbs, which was instrumental on that particular day in helping me realize how foolishly I had been acting. I also believe that God has a sense of humor, because he inspired my parents to give me the middle name of Solomon knowing that I would have this great affinity for the Book of Proverbs, one of the greatest repositories of wisdom. Like Solomon, I, too, gained great notoriety as a surgeon who divided babies, who in this case were conjoined at the head.

			Even though my mother had very little formal education and thus little knowledge, she was extremely observant and very wise. Since she worked as a domestic in the homes of very successful people, she decided to observe how they managed their lives to achieve success. She compared their actions with those of the many unsuccessful people who populated our surroundings, and after careful analysis concluded that the big difference was reading and studying. Hence her insistence that my brother and I read two books per week. Although this move was quite unpopular, it yielded tremendous results for both my brother, Curtis, and me. My mother’s wisdom prompted her to use the little knowledge she had to greatly benefit her sons.

			While wisdom dictates the need for education, education does not necessarily make one wise. I remember a man when I was growing up who was extremely well educated and had two master’s degrees. He could wax eloquently on many subjects but had a very difficult time sustaining himself economically. In fact, he would frequently mooch off of anyone who would take pity on him. On the other hand, many of the greatest achievers in our society never finished college. That includes Bill Gates Jr., Steve Jobs, and Dan Snyder, who is the owner of the Washington Redskins. This does not mean that higher education isn’t highly desirable and beneficial, but it does indicate that the wise use of knowledge is more important than knowledge itself.

			As my wife and I traveled around the country over the last few months, we encountered large and enthusiastic crowds, many of whom feel that I should run for public office. I believe what they are really clamoring for is not me per se, but for the return of common sense and intelligible speech to solve our ever-increasing problems.





Many Experts Lack Wisdom


			It is always interesting to watch the “experts” expound on various topics from the economy to national defense to social issues, and so on, sometimes presenting a host of statistics and little-known studies as proof of their expertise. They claim that their knowledge and all those letters behind their name give them unquestionable authority to declare truth. Some of these experts continue to claim that our economy remains sluggish because we are not borrowing and spending at a greater rate. They want another stimulus package and if that doesn’t work, I can guarantee you they will want yet another. I will admit that these people are very knowledgeable, but I severely doubt that they possess wisdom. I believe my mother with her third-grade education could come up with a better plan than theirs. When someone does challenge them, they love to say, “That person is not an expert and can’t possibly know what she’s talking about.”

			I have to chuckle when some of them say that “Ben Carson is a neurosurgeon and can’t possibly know anything about economics.” Many of these same people were involved in crafting the Affordable Care Act even though their training is not in health care. They say that economic principles have broad application and therefore their recommendations are legitimate. I say that common sense has broad application and can be used in all areas. In fact, I would choose common sense over knowledge in almost every circumstance. I also like to point out that five physicians signed the Declaration of Independence, our founding document, and they certainly were not shy about expressing their views regarding the principles that should govern our nation.





A Vision for a Wiser Health Care System


			As a doctor, I believe I have acquired some wisdom that can be applied to our need for a well-functioning health care system for the nation. The agenda needs to be the health of the people as opposed to a political feather in a cap, and being a doctor, I would make that a priority more naturally than would a politician. Unfortunately, the Affordable Care Act was more of a victory for the Obama administration than for the American people.

			In order to have good health care, you need a patient and a health care provider. Originally, the middleman facilitated the relationship between a person and their doctor, but now the middleman is the primary entity, with the health care provider and the patient at his beck and call. The middleman gains financially by denying health care to clients, even when they are supposed to be facilitating the health care process. The whole system is upside down and it is no wonder that it is dysfunctional.

			If we are to reform the system, we must know what the overriding goals of reform are. First, not only do we need to stop the rapid rise of health care costs, we need to decrease these costs. Second, we need to make sure that everyone has access to basic health care. Third, we need to restore the doctor-patient relationship and put patients back in charge of their own health. (These are not given in order of importance.)

			As I said at the National Prayer Breakfast, I believe everyone should have a health savings account (HSA) and an electronic medical record (EMR) at the time of birth as a first step toward reform. The EMR should only be in the patient’s possession in the form of an electronic chip embedded into a card or device that can be shared with a health care provider at the patient’s discretion. It would not be available to the IRS or any other governmental agency, and the database would of course need to be as secure as possible to protect personal information from hackers. The HSA could be populated with funds supplied by an employer, the owner, relatives, friends, and governmental sources.

			Since we already spend twice as much per capita on health care in America as does any other country in the world, even if we put substantial monies in everyone’s HSA, there’s a strong possibility that our shared national health care cost would still decrease. Because there are many responsible individuals and employers who would be willing to contribute to the HSA’s, it would only be necessary for the government to make contributions in the cases of individuals incapable of making a living. In Singapore, the government deducts regular contributions to the medical savings accounts from each worker’s paycheck. Singapore is capable of providing excellent medical care for all citizens for less than a quarter of what we pay.

			With each person owning his own HSA in the United States, most people would become interested in saving by shopping for the most cost-effective high-quality health care plans available. This would bring the entire health care industry into the free-market economic model resulting in price transparency and creating a system where services and pricing are more closely related to value. In our current third-party insurance-based health-care payment system, it would not be unusual to find a hospital in one part of town that charges $66,000 for an appendectomy while in the same city another hospital charges only $14,000 for the same operation. Since a third party is responsible for the payments, the patient doesn’t really care which of the two hospitals is used, and spends an unnecessarily large amount of money.

			Approximately 80 percent of all encounters between the health care provider and the patient in a system where HSAs are widely used would be covered by the private account with no need to involve a third party. Since most of the relationships would be doctor-patient relationships, the doctors certainly would not order things without regard to price, and patients would not permit excessive depletion of their HSA’s by careless expenditure. With everybody becoming cost conscious, price transparency would be of paramount importance and fair competition would cause prices to be consistent and reasonable.

			It is natural to ask what happens if a man needs an operation and does not have enough money in his HSA to cover the cost? The system would be designed in such a way that allows members of his immediate family to shift money from their HSA accounts to his without any penalties. In essence, this would make each family unit its own private health insurance company with no unnecessary middleman increasing costs. I would also make it possible for people to pass the money in their HSAs to family members at the time of their death. This would largely eliminate incentive to spend the money in the account in order not to lose it.

			A portion of the money in the account could be used to purchase bridge or catastrophic insurance, which would be relatively inexpensive since it would only be used for those 20 percent of cases too expensive to be covered by the typical HSA account. This would work in a manner similar to homeowners insurance that has a high deductible. If that homeowners insurance was used for every type of repair needed on the home with little or no deduction, the cost would be astronomical. Since it is used only for major and expensive home repairs and because routine repairs are taken care of primarily by the homeowner, the cost is reasonable.

			The HSA accounts would only be for bona fide medical purposes and the money could not be borrowed and/or legally used for any other reason. Special precautions would be in place to oversee the accounts of addicts and other people who have proven themselves to be fiscally irresponsible. In the case of individuals who are mentally incapacitated, a trustworthy family member would likely be appointed as guardian of their HSA account. It could also be made possible for any adult to donate up to a certain predetermined amount of money from their account to any other person’s account for charitable reasons. This becomes an easy way for churches and other organizations to provide charity care at their discretion. It also would encourage those people with massive amounts of money in their accounts to think charitably toward others.

			This system would put people back in charge of their own health care, bring down costs, and eliminate massive regulatory bureaucratic nightmares for both patients and providers.

			Tort reform on a national basis would be an essential part of this plan. When doctors have to practice defensive medicine, some procedures are done and tests are ordered purely for medicolegal reasons. Virtually every other nation in the world has figured out a way to take care of patients who suffer as a result of attempts by medical personnel to help them. I practiced in Australia for one year as a neurosurgeon, and my malpractice premiums were only $200 a year at that time. Compare this with the $300,000 malpractice insurance fee assessed on a litigation-free neurosurgeon in Philadelphia today.

			The quality of neurosurgical care in Australia was excellent just as it is in America, but at that time it was difficult or impossible to bring a medical malpractice lawsuit against someone on a contingency basis. In other words, you had to take money out of your own pocket in order to sue someone, which meant you were unlikely to do that unless you had a very good case. In our system you can sue and pay little or nothing while engaging in activities that might make you a millionaire. It certainly should come as no surprise to anyone that certain lawyers and patients alike would want to take advantage of such a medical lottery.

			We need to have a national system that allows immediate and appropriate compensation for medical injuries. If a particular practitioner is responsible on a regular basis for patient compensation due to inappropriate care, that information would be available as a public record and savvy consumers who were vigilant regarding the distribution of their HSA dollars would be unlikely to frequent such practitioners. Retraining or disciplinary actions might also be easier to enact. This is another example of how the free market can be a positive force in ensuring excellence.

			I am currently working with other health care providers and legislators to incorporate these ideas into a truly affordable health care plan that is relatively simple and puts patients and doctors back in charge of health care. It is vital that we emphasize the importance of working together in a bipartisan fashion, because sickness and disease have no party affiliation, nor should those who are trying to conquer them. If Obamacare continues to crumble and/or is defunded, no one should gloat or say, “I told you so.” This is not a time to proclaim victory, but rather a time to put aside our differences and solve a difficult problem.

			In the meantime, I have frequently expressed doubts about the wisdom of imposing a gigantic governmental program like Obamacare without first testing its components. Common sense would dictate a piecemeal implementation of such a massive program since it profoundly affects virtually every American family. As the program is being rolled out, even its most fanatical supporters are starting to see major flaws and losing their enthusiasm for what is destined to be a disaster.

			Many promises were made about the program including the famous presidential promise that “If you like your current insurance, you can keep it.” On an almost weekly basis we hear about organizations that are dropping or altering the insurance they offer and about health care providers who are retiring or changing the way they practice. This means that millions of Americans who were satisfied with their health care plans now have to make costly and worrisome changes. Many who previously had health care insurance have been demoted to part-time status, so not only do they lose their insurance, but they lose substantial income. The very fact that everyone is looking for exclusions so they don’t have to participate right away should be a red flag to any objective observer.





Learn from Mistakes


			One of the prime indicators of wisdom is the ability to see a mistake and back away while learning from it. As Proverbs says, “As a dog returns to its vomit, so a fool repeats his foolishness.” Ideology frequently renders one incapable of learning and instead makes its ideologues expert excuse makers. They always have someone or something to blame for the failure of their ideas, which in their opinion can’t possibly be flawed in any way. You will hardly ever hear the words “I’m sorry,” or “I was wrong” coming from their lips. When you see people who fit this description, common sense should tell you they are not to be trusted. Sometimes they are gifted with flowery speech and a pleasant persona, which makes them even more dangerous and misleading, particularly for the trusting souls who want so much to believe in them. There is nothing wrong with wanting desperately to believe in someone or some idea, but the application of common sense should tell anyone with a modicum of objectivity that if that person or those ideas consistently yield bad results, their allegiance should be reconsidered.





Set Priorities Wisely


			Another key characteristic of wisdom is the ability to prioritize. One must have perspective in order to know which things are most important. Several administrations have talked about the importance of energy independence, yet we remain as dependent on foreign oil as we were years ago. This is because of a problem with priorities. The Environmental Protection Agency feels it has a duty to protect every aspect of the environment under all circumstances, and that priority has been placed above energy independence.

			It is estimated that the amount of oil in the Dakotas and Montana is eight times greater than the amount of oil in Saudi Arabia. Yet the EPA has made it difficult for us to take advantage of the enormous amounts of shale oil available in that area of our nation because of pollution problems, and our government has not done much to find a new solution.

			With the knowledge of the shale oil and the problems, a wise overseer would be encouraging the development of safe and clean ways to take advantage of this energy bounty rather than trying to shut down proponents of its use. If you were a seller of jewels and decided to extract them from a cave by using dynamite, but then discovered that the jewels would be ruined by the dynamite blast, you could just give up and say these dynamite blasts destroy air quality and don’t yield quality jewels. Or if you were wise, you could say let’s look for better and safer ways to extract a valuable commodity.

			I thoroughly believe that we have a duty to protect our environment not only for ourselves but for the next generations. However, we also have a duty to develop our economic potential and free ourselves of unnecessary stress and dependency on volatile foreign sources of energy. As a bonus, energy independence for us means decreased revenues for radical terrorist elements who aim to destroy our way of life. Wisdom would lead us to find solutions reflecting those priorities.





Humility Comes Before Wisdom


			How does one acquire wisdom? First and foremost, one must be humble enough to recognize that one doesn’t know everything. “The more you know, the less you know.” This saying means that a wise person understands that on any given issue, there is still much knowledge to be acquired, while the foolish glory in their limited knowledge. It is essential for the prosperity of our nation that our leaders be endowed with knowledge and wisdom.

			The acquisition of knowledge is relatively straightforward, but wisdom has to be sought prayerfully from many sources. First, anyone who is trying to live her life wisely should imitate my mother and observe carefully what is going on around her. If you can learn from the triumphs and mistakes of others, you can move further and faster along the path of success. Second, you can also learn a great deal from your own failures if you are willing to admit failure. Finally and most important, consult God, the source of all wisdom. I ask God for wisdom and guidance on a daily basis, and His answers were instrumental during my surgical career, especially when dealing with situations that were unique and extraordinarily complex. His wisdom is at least equally important in my retirement. Pray for wisdom and believe that you will receive a positive answer to that request as the Bible commands in James 1:5. He always provides what is necessary and will guide us in the best way to serve Him and love our neighbors.

			Action Steps

			 				Ask an older and wiser person for his or her perspective on a controversial issue.

				Read the first four chapters of the Book of Proverbs in the Bible this week. Glean the wisdom that is there for the taking.

				Think of a recent mistake you made and determine to learn from it.

				Consider your priorities—should you be spending your time differently?





MY BROTHER’S KEEPER



Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker, but those who help the poor honor Him.

			PROVERBS 14:31



In the mid-1960s my aunt Jean and uncle William were finally able to escape the inner city of Boston and move to a rural home in the town of Holly, Michigan. They had lived in Michigan before moving to Boston a decade earlier and had always dreamed about returning home. Uncle William still had a lot of friends in Michigan and under his supervision, and with a lot of backbreaking effort, they were able to build a reasonable home.

			Uncle William had a brother by the name of Albert who was developmentally disabled, or retarded, as they used to say. There was no possibility of Albert’s ever being able to care for himself and my uncle felt it was his responsibility to make sure that all of Albert’s basic needs were met. He and my aunt constructed a small home on the property for Albert, and he was pretty reclusive. Even though Albert could not read, write, or even communicate in a way that most people understood, he was capable of hard work, including transporting heavy objects, loading and unloading trucks, and other activities where brawn was more important than brains. Albert was always proud when he put in a good day of labor and he enjoyed a good meal. He trusted Uncle William and was very obedient.

			The children, including yours truly, were frightened of Albert at first, but as time went on we got to know that he was actually quite benign and very shy. By the time I went off to college at Yale, I had grown quite fond of Albert and my girlfriend Candy, who later became my wife, liked him also.

			Albert had never worked outside of the home nor had served in the military, so there was no source of public assistance to help with his care. My relatives never complained about the care they provided for Albert and in fact they felt it was their duty.

			My aunt and uncle are examples of a mind-set that seems to be dying out in recent years. Until recently, it was expected in America that families would take care of their own disabled or poor, regardless of whether the government provided any assistance. There was a strong sense of responsibility for family and neighbors in need, a sense that unfortunately is much rarer today. Instead of caring for the disabled and elderly, many Americans expect the government to care for them, resulting in a lowered standard of care and a ballooning national debt. Compounding the problem, many others have embraced models of government assistance that actually push the poor into deeper cycles of poverty. Until these patterns are broken, our nation will continue to decline.





Socialism: A Deterrent to Charity


			In many socialist societies the basic needs of the elderly and poor are provided by the state. This is expensive, a problem that is partially resolved by denying certain medical treatments to the elderly. Socialism demands that every member of society have their basic needs provided for by the government, but it is nearly impossible to stay ahead of the expanding costs in this type of governing structure so the citizens become enslaved by governmental debt.

			Does capitalism offer a better solution? The answer is a resounding yes, as long as personal responsibility and compassion are included. Capitalism practiced without such elements has given the entire idea of a free market a bad rap, when in reality, every economic system is insufficient and undesirable when it is devoid of virtue. Capitalism certainly should not mean “every man for himself” but should instead allow every man to freely earn and freely share with his neighbor.





Respectful Care for the Elderly


			Caring for one’s family is a basic responsibility that is becoming increasingly crucial in today’s economy. Rapidly shifting population demographics indicate a need to reconsider how we care for the elderly in our nation. Less than half of the population can now look forward to a comfortable retirement at age sixty-five because retirement plans have been derailed by a stagnant economy with no signs of a lasting and meaningful recovery. Many older couples can certainly pay their mortgage, car notes, utility bills, and supply food and some level of entertainment without much difficulty as long as they continue to work. With the job market undergoing many changes, it will be hard for many elderly individuals who do not have appropriate skills to keep up and they may be forced into retirement.

			Unfortunately, the proliferation of nursing homes and elder care facilities in our society indicates that many families are reluctant to exercise enough compassion to care for their own parents and relatives. In some cases people must work outside the home to earn a living and have relatives who cannot be left alone, and these cases are understandable, but those who expect others to care for their parents and don’t even visit them should remember that these people took care of them when they could not care for themselves.

			In cases where the problem is due more to circumstances rather than lack of character, we need to work together to find solutions. The task of providing full-time care for the elderly or disabled has become progressively more difficult in families where everyone is working outside the home and no one can be a full-time guardian for the person(s) in need. Fortunately, there is an old saying that “necessity is the mother of invention.” The importance of caring for one’s own remains unchanged, and our society needs to create new ways of doing this.

			In some ways, this is already happening. A whole new industry known as adult day care arose because of this necessity. It has created many jobs and provided a stimulating and safe environment for millions of elderly and incapacitated individuals. Many of these adult day care centers are independently owned and operated with little or no assistance from the government. Community living with the ability to pool and share resources can provide a healthy social environment while reducing financial obligations. A variety of such communities can be built around the nation quite economically, allowing freedom and peace of mind to those who deserve a period of relaxation in their lives. These are the kinds of organizations that should be encouraged as time goes on, particularly in light of the growing number of elderly individuals in our society. If we just depend on government programs as the number of elders increases faster than our young population, it will accelerate our rate of debt accumulation, which will negatively affect us all.

			We also need to encourage everyone to feel a responsibility toward taking care of their elderly parents and disabled relatives. It should be anticipated that the day will come when it will be necessary to do this, as it probably will be for each of us to be taken care of by sons and daughters, nieces and nephews, in-laws, or other relatives in the future. This care can be expensive, but it is not nearly as costly as nursing homes and other full-time care facilities. If these expenses are anticipated and resources are set aside accordingly, undue hardship and guilt can frequently be avoided.

			I know there will be some people saying, “I can barely care for my own needs, how can anyone expect me to provide for someone else, even if they are my parents?” During the time in America when these kinds of questions were not asked, people didn’t necessarily have to have multiple vehicles, flat screen televisions, multiple cell phones, iPads, and a host of other “necessities.” This begs the question: Is it more important to take care of your extended family or have the creature comforts pop culture demands?





Compassion for the Poor


			Anyone familiar with the Bible knows that our responsibilities to care for others don’t end with our families. There are numerous Biblical references to our obligations to care for the poor and to love our neighbors as ourselves. And even if you don’t believe in God and/or the Bible, there are commonsense reasons to exercise compassion toward the poor. Most of us have an innate sense that it is right to care for those less fortunate than ourselves, and even those with the hardest hearts should understand that elevating the social status of the poor is better for the economy as a whole.

			Compassion, however, should mean providing a mechanism to escape poverty rather than simply maintaining people in an impoverished state by supplying handouts. By doing this we give them an opportunity to elevate their personal situations, which eventually decreases our need to take care of them and empowers them to be able to exercise compassion toward others.





The Problem of Government Dependency


			Having established that we should care about our neighbors, the next question is who is my neighbor and where does my responsibility end, leaving the government in charge? My answer will come as a great surprise to many, but I do not believe the government has any obligation to take care of able-bodied citizens who are capable of providing for themselves. Private citizens, on the other hand, should be encouraged but not coerced to provide as much aid and opportunities to their neighbors as they are capable of. Indiscriminately providing for the needs of people who can provide for themselves is not only unwise, it is cruel because it tends in many cases to create dependency and robs people of their God-given dignity.

			The only reason I can imagine that it would be a good idea for government to foster dependency in large groups of citizens is to cultivate a dependable voting bloc that will guarantee continued power as long as the entitlements are provided. The problem of course is that such a government will eventually “run out of other people’s money,” as Margaret Thatcher once famously said.





The Value of the Minimum-Wage Job


			As I mentioned earlier, it is quite possible to obtain more money from the welfare system than one would get from a minimum-wage job. It is hard to criticize someone who takes advantage of such a situation. The problem with this line of thinking is that it relegates the value of job experience to a lowly position on the totem pole.

			I have had many jobs on the way to becoming a physician, all of which provided some knowledge and skill sets that were useful, no matter how low-skilled and low-paid they were. My first jobs were as a lab assistant both in high school and at Wayne State University in Detroit, where I learned concepts such as sterility and how to set up laboratory experiments. During the summer between high school and college, I obtained a job as a payroll office clerk at the Ford Motors world headquarters, where I learned about many office machines and how to operate them. Next I had a job as a bank teller, where I learned accuracy and efficiency as well some things about dealing with bank robbers. A job as a mailroom clerk taught me various ways of efficient filing and delivery, and a job as an encyclopedia salesman taught me much about presentation. One of my best experiences was as a supervisor for highway cleanup crews. I learned how to motivate individuals who were not interested in working and I learned the importance of teamwork in the generation of an efficient workforce.

			My experience as an assembly line worker in an automobile factory taught me the importance of concentration, and my job as a student aid to the Yale University campus police gave me an opportunity to learn a great deal about security for a large organization. With that job there were also a lot of perks, like being able to get into concerts free of charge. And I derived great benefit from my job as an X-ray technician between my first and second years in medical school. Learning how to operate that equipment led to a subsequent new technique for visualizing a difficult part of the skull that facilitated a complex neurosurgical procedure. Later in life as an attending neurosurgeon, occasions would arise when X-rays had to be taken in the operating room and all the X-ray technicians were tied up elsewhere. I was able to save a great deal of time by being able to operate the equipment myself, which typically amazed the operating room staff.

			I also had a job as a crane operator in a steel factory that helped me realize that I was gifted with great eye-hand coordination, a fact that later affected my career choice. Finally, a job as a school bus driver taught me to be extremely cautious around small schoolchildren.

			On the surface it might appear that many of these jobs had nothing to do with a successful career as a neurosurgeon, but closer analysis should lead one to the understanding that no knowledge is wasted knowledge. It can be used in virtually any career, and opens many doors of opportunity.

			I don’t wish to sound cold, but sitting around collecting welfare checks is unlikely to bolster one’s résumé and expose one to job opportunities. When you make yourself valuable by acquiring knowledge and many skills, you make yourself more employable. Even if no one wants to hire you, you can create your own job. Being able to cut a lawn, weed a lawn, or garden, cook, clean, paint, wash cars, pick fruits and vegetables, and so on may not make you a millionaire, but certainly can pay the bills and put food on the table if you are not extravagant.

			Sometimes one has to be humble enough to start at the bottom with a minimum-wage job even if you have a college degree. Once you get your foot in the door, you can prove your worth and rapidly move up the ladder. If you never get in the door, it is unlikely that you will rise to the top.

			I have no doubt that there are millions of extremely talented and intelligent people who have dropped out of the labor force and are living on the dole. They are not counted as unemployed, which makes the government happy, because it can claim that the jobless numbers are improving. These people are doing no one, including themselves, a favor by depriving the labor force of their potential contributions. If you know such individuals, please share this chapter with them and encourage them to go out and make the American dream come true in their lives—that is one way of being your brother’s keeper.





Rolling Back Welfare


			One logical and compassionate solution to the problem of growing welfare rolls is to set a date several years away for the elimination of welfare payments for able-bodied individuals who could work and support themselves. This would give them time to prepare for the job market and it would also make people much more careful in their family planning. Some liberals would say that is mean and heartless, but some conservatives would say that continuing to sustain people in a dependent position with meager welfare payments is what is really cruel, because it frequently removes the incentive to engage in self-improvement activities.





People (Not Government) Helping People


			When it comes to empowering those who have been rendered complacent by an overly generous system that cultivates their votes rather than their talents, churches and other charitable organizations can play an important role. Loving and caring relationships with those in need of jobs and self-esteem can bring hope and encouragement to the downtrodden, especially when combined with examples of success, the provision of opportunities, and training to achieve that success. It’s all about people helping people, which is why such organizations exist in the first place and why they have tax-exempt status.

			The Reformed Church of Bronxville, New York, has a mentorship program called “Coming Home,” which aids formerly incarcerated individuals in their adjustment and acclimation into society. Dawn Ravella, the director of mission and outreach at the church said,


The idea is to absorb them into a supportive community to help with the re-entry process, deal with the trauma and to help them get back on their feet. . . . It’s so powerful what’s happening here. We at the church thought we were starting this to help other people, and it’s been transformational for us.

			This program has been duplicated in at least eight other churches in New York City.

			And as far as helping the downtrodden, since 2005, 600,000 volunteers have worked 1.4 million man-hours under the auspices of Samaritan’s Purse led by Franklin Graham, helping 24,000 families in 140 disasters across the nation. Also, their “Operation Heal Our Patriots” program liberates double-amputee veterans, enabling them to live more normal lives.

			Some people are not religious and do not believe that religion is helpful, but hopefully such people are desirous of helping their fellow citizens achieve success in their lives. There is absolutely no reason why they cannot cooperate with churches and community organizations in a synergistic fashion to once again achieve a growing and vital economy that offers people a hand up rather than a handout.

			I am particularly fond of churches because they are supposed to show kindness toward others, and if they do not, they can be embarrassed when that is pointed out to them, resulting in renewed efforts to help others. Other types of organizations, especially government agencies, are frequently staffed by people who only see it as a job, know they have job security, and therefore treat people without respect or compassion. If I had the authority to do so, I would plant random observers around governmental employees who could record their pattern of behavior and dismiss without recourse those people who manifested consistently unacceptable behavior. I believe that would quickly alter the nonchalant attitudes of government employees. I also believe that these employees would feel better about their jobs and themselves with the application of kindness and compassion to their daily chores.





What About Those Who Won’t Take Responsibility?


			I can’t leave this topic without talking about those individuals in our society who are completely and utterly irresponsible. Who is responsible for taking care of those who have no intention of taking care of themselves? If they are not devoid of mental faculties, it is safe to assume that their behavior pattern is learned and that it can be unlearned by allowing them to experience the consequences of their choices. This is one of the ways that children are taught to be responsible and I believe it is a technique that will also work for adults who act like children.

			Those who are horrified at such a suggestion should feel perfectly free to take these individuals under their wings and care for their needs. I believe in grace and am grateful for the undeserved mercy that I have received, especially mercy that forced me to better myself. However, to thrust this responsibility of caring for them on everyone else is unfair and encourages others to adopt similar irresponsible lifestyles.

			We should be dedicated to providing for all of our citizens life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That means giving them the opportunity to pursue any course of action they choose for the purpose of bringing fulfillment to their lives, assuming it is legal. In no reasonable way can our responsibility as a society be interpreted as providing for the needs of all citizens, especially if they are ones who by choice make no attempt to provide for themselves. Again, this applies only to individuals who are fully capable of taking care of themselves.





True Compassion—A Rare Thing


			Unfortunately, both Republican and Democratic politicians will have objections to the proposals I have made. I have heard some conservatives say all of us should have enough sense to adequately prepare for our retirement and if we fail to do so, we should have to suffer the consequences. Although there may be some merit to this sentiment, it does not show compassion. We are all human beings with shortcomings, therefore whenever we are capable of helping someone in need, we should do so even if his own mistakes produced the need, because this is what we would want them to do if the situation were reversed. I have heard some liberals say we have an obligation to fully take care of everyone regardless of lifestyle and poor choices. This lack of tough love encourages more irresponsible behavior and a progressively larger number of people to care for until all resources are exhausted. This seems compassionate, but instead is cruel like anything else that fosters dependency.

			In short, yes, we are our brothers’ keepers, but we have to be smart in the way that we keep them, and the compassion we show must be in consideration of the long term, with a defined purpose of providing life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

			Action Steps

			 				Check on an elderly relative or friend this week.

				Go out of your way to help a stranger this week.

				Commit a percentage of your time for volunteer work at a local charity this month.

				Find out what your church or religious organization is doing for your community.





WITHOUT A VISION



When people do not accept divine guidance, they run wild. But whoever obeys the law is happy.

			PROVERBS 29:18



When I was in middle school I was friends with a nice young man named Charlie, who served as a punching bag for many of the other students, including the class bully, Randy. One day when the teacher was not in the room, Randy beat Charlie and began strangling him. Many of the other students gasped in horror and thought that they were going to witness a murder. Fortunately, Randy came to his senses and desisted from his attack. Charlie was visibly shaken but continued with his nonconfrontational demeanor until one day one of the smaller boys attacked him and he decided to fight back. Not only did he win the fight but he completely dominated the contest, leaving the other boy in a state of total humiliation that was well deserved. That day marked a turning point in Charlie’s life and he became a completely different person. His confidence grew and people stopped picking on him. He also became a much better student and went on to become very successful in high school.

			Charlie’s metamorphosis occurred when he faced significant trials in his life head-on. His ordeal strengthened him, and his victory gave him a different vision for his life. He did not necessarily become a combatant, but he gained enough self-confidence to be able to live his life without fear. Once he had a glimpse of how good life could be out from under a bully’s thumb, he began to take himself seriously. What happened with Charlie undoubtedly gave me the courage to resist a bully later in my life. Without his example, I might not have known it would be possible to stand up for myself, to envision a life free of being bullied.

			Bullying by the British was a major impetus for the resistance movement that resulted in our ultimate independence and the establishment of our Constitution. An even bigger role was played in the establishment of a national vision by the desire for freedom. Our founders saw themselves as free people who could pursue whatever dreams inspired them. However, success is never achieved by people who only dream and do not act. My wife and I have some close friends who are examples of this truth. The husband was an attorney and the wife was an elementary school teacher. She was constantly talking about her dream of becoming a lawyer but she never really pursued that dream. I remember saying to her one day, “Just do it and stop dreaming.” I reminded her that it only takes three years to complete law school and that three years goes by quite rapidly. She has been a successful attorney for many years and has established quite a reputation. Our founders were able to conquer their fears and act on their dreams on the way to establishing a spectacular vision for America. They embedded that vision in the Constitution of the United States of America and intended for that document to be revered and held up as a guidepost for a truly free society.

			Proverbs 29:18 (NKJV) says, “Without a vision the people perish.” If a society doesn’t have a shared understanding of its goals, it cannot move forward. To aimlessly drift along while reacting to events is a recipe for disaster. As Americans, we have the vision of our founders, codified in the Constitution and lived out by citizens who worked together, as a heritage. Unless we recover our lost vision, communicate it simply to the next generation, and seek out visionary leaders, our country will remain in serious trouble.





The Constitution as Vision


			During the American Revolution, the colonies differed from one another in many ways but had a shared vision of liberation from a dominating British monarch. Each of the states had different mechanisms for achieving economic success and they had different feelings about the institution of slavery, but their overwhelming desire was to be able to pursue their dreams without outside interference. They were wise enough to recognize that their chances of success would be greatly enhanced if they worked together.

			In 1787, the union almost split apart due to what were thought to be irreconcilable differences. It took the wise words of the senior statesman, Benjamin Franklin, to reinstate unity with his recommendation of prayer. He and other leaders were subsequently able to help frame one of the most concise and inspirational national visions ever crafted, namely, the U.S. Constitution.

			The Constitution was written primarily to protect the rights of the people and not the rights of the government to rule the people. It restrains the natural tendencies of government to expand while disregarding the rights of its constituents. Our freedoms are safe as long as we abide by its principles.





Drifting Away


			Unfortunately, the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of government have become increasingly concerned with their image and their political parties, have drifted away from strict interpretations of the Constitution, and have substituted their own ideologies for the original vision. As a result, our government produces massively complicated taxation schemes, impossibly intricate and uninterpretable health care laws, and other intrusive measures instead of being a watchful guardian of our rights. Instead of providing an environment that allows diligent people to thrive on the basis of their own hard work and entrepreneurship, our government has taken on the role of trying to care for everyone’s needs and redistributing the fruits of everyone’s labors in a way consistent with its own ideology.





A New Utopian Vision?


			Under this new vision for America, lawmakers are not particularly concerned with the people’s will, since they firmly believe that they know better than the people. Confident in the superiority of their ideas, they cram measures like the Affordable Care Act down the throats of protesting citizens and then have the nerve to tell the people that they’ll like it once they understand it. This kind of paternal attitude is changing us from a representative type of governmental structure to a nanny state, where the government tells the constituency what’s good for them and monitors and regulates every aspect of their lives.

			The vision of this new form of government is a society where the basic needs of everyone are provided and no one needs to fret about anything, regardless of whether they choose to work hard and be productive or relax and enjoy life. This is a very attractive vision to those looking for a free ride. It certainly would not have been the kind of vision that hundreds of years ago would have caused many immigrants to cross treacherous seas and leave behind loved ones in order to try to provide a better future for their families.

			The United States is not the first nation to alter its vision to include a more communal society, an alteration which on its surface seems like a noble goal. The problems with these utopian goals is that they never work in practice. For the government to be able to distribute goods to everyone, there must be significant production of goods and services. If producers know that the government is going to redistribute the wealth they accumulate, they have little incentive to increase production to meet the demand—they would be working more for the same amount of income. If the government decides to force the producer to manufacture more goods, a new problem arises: It is very difficult for a centralized government to know exactly how much to produce without the signals of a free market. Thus centralized economies usually end up with a mismatch between supply and demand.

			Practical problems aside, there are moral problems with redistribution. Thomas Jefferson famously put it similarly when he said, “To take from one, because it is thought his own industry and that of his father’s has acquired too much, in order to spare to others, who, or whose fathers, have not exercised equal industry and skill, is to violate arbitrarily the first principle of association, the guarantee to everyone the free exercise of his industry and the fruits acquired by it.” The utopian vision of communal societies strongly disagrees with Jefferson’s views and would advocate for equitable redistribution to prevent massive accumulation by any one group or poverty by another group. The communal philosophy does not recognize exceptional production by individuals or exceptional nonproduction.

			When the vision of the U.S. government included guarding the rights of people but staying out of their way, America was an economic engine more powerful than anything the world had ever witnessed. That engine is still in place, and if the original vision can be restored, that engine could restart and quickly obliterate our national debt while helping our nation reclaim its rightful position of leadership and respect throughout the world. Our ability to care for the indigent would also be considerably enhanced and the number of indigent would be significantly decreased in a thriving job market.





Deep Division


			Because of our neglect of the Constitution, it has been a while since the people of America could agree on a national vision. Perhaps the last time was toward the end of the Cold War when our unity and strength radically changed the world’s power structure for the better. There was a great deal of unity across party lines and the resultant national vision made us a formidable foe or a powerful ally. Today we are deeply divided along ideological lines, as discussed earlier in the book. As a result, our political climate changes dramatically every time power shifts from one party to another. Massive swings to the right are followed by massive swings to the left, destroying the unity that was our strength.

			There are deep and sometimes hostile divisions between those who believe in God and those who are atheists. Even deeper divisions exist between those who believe in personal responsibility and those who believe that there is no problem with government dependency. Many believe that as the world’s only superpower the United States should engage in strong international leadership, while others feel strongly that we should adopt a laissez-faire attitude. The right to bear arms versus the concern for public safety has produced a deep chasm as have attitudes about gay marriage, abortion, and other social issues. Every time the pendulum swings it leaves more deeply entrenched people at the extremities of the swing. This exacerbates tensions that used to be relatively minor differences.

			Because we have strayed so far from the original intent of our nation’s goals, and because philosophical differences are so deep and entrenched, the legitimate question is whether our disparities can be peacefully resolved, resulting in a long-term forward trajectory instead of massive pendulum swings. I believe it is possible for us to adopt a positive direction, but it will require exceptionally wise and courageous leadership.





A Constitutional Convention?


			Recently, some radio commentators have suggested the need for another constitutional convention since the last one was more than two hundred years ago. While I would be delighted to see a new convention, I don’t believe it is practical due to the size, complexity, dishonesty, and animosity that characterizes our political structure today. Fortunately, our founders were visionary and wise men who could foresee the turmoil we now face and anticipated almost everything that would be destructive to their vision except apathy on behalf of the populace in terms of protecting our freedom.





Revering the Constitution


			I believe the only thing that will correct our downward trajectory is the rekindling of the enthusiasm for individual freedom and the reestablishment of the U.S. Constitution as the dominant document of governance. Unless the majority of Americans awaken from their complacency and recognize the threat to their fundamental individual liberties imposed by continued expansion of the federal government, nothing will save us from the fate of all pinnacle nations that have preceded us, those that tolerated political and moral corruption while ignoring fiscal irresponsibility.

			We the people have lost the inspiration that produced the “can-do attitude” that was our foremost characteristic. We have capitulated to the forces of ever-expanding governmental control of our lives. But it is not too late for us to change. As a beginning, all American citizens must be familiar with our Constitution, and they must be brave enough to stand up for its principles even if that makes them temporarily unpopular. They must be willing to share their knowledge with others and encourage frank discussions rather than “going along to get along.”





Voting for the Constitution


			The last point that I just mentioned is the safeguard that our founders built into our system of government to allow “we the people” to rectify an out-of-control governmental structure. As outraged citizens, we have the power to vote out of office any politician who refuses to uphold the Constitution.

			One of the most important steps that must be taken if America is to remain free is stimulation of the large voter base that has basically tuned out of politics. One of the political parties or perhaps a new political party has to be dependable and courageously uphold the Constitution. The fact that the Republican Party in particular often seems to stand for principle, only to cave in to pressure at the last minute, has turned off a huge number of voters. A true reformation of the Republican Party would be a breath of fresh air for those voters. Those voters are also up for grabs for the Democrats if they decide suddenly that they want to be the party of the Constitution. In an ideal world, both parties would desire to uphold the Constitution, and their energies could be spent elsewhere, including solving our nation’s problems instead of engaging in ideological squabbles.

			Just prior to the start of the American Revolution, and throughout its duration, concerned citizens engaged in self-education and education of others by convening community meetings, often in one another’s homes, to discuss the desire for freedom and the threat posed by inaction. The same kinds of meetings were held throughout Europe during and after the Dark Ages in an attempt to keep Christianity alive. Both movements were successful because people became activists and used their collective skills, resources, and intellect to bring about the changes they desired. If Americans would meet together the same way and discuss which candidates would best honor the Constitutional vision, our future’s security would be much improved.

			In making decisions about who should be replaced, it is important for the people not to be deceived by those politicians who claim that the matters they are dealing with and voting on are too complex for the average citizen to understand. I believe our political role models should be people who understand and revere the U.S. Constitution and are willing to defend it from those who feel it is outdated. We need people who can articulate their beliefs in a way that is easily understandable, and people who are willing to point out who among their compatriots are deviating from the Constitution and why. People who are worried about reelection are terrible representatives, especially when they place reelection above principles. Until we the people learn to identify and support those political role models who truly represent our interests, we can expect continued deterioration of governmental trust and ongoing governmental expansion into every aspect of our lives.

			In my opinion, if politicians are unable to explain a law or statute in a way that a seventh grader could understand it, then they don’t understand it either and should be provided an opportunity to study after being voted out of office. Anyone who writes a law that cannot be easily understood by an average citizen is not worthy of leadership. The Constitution, which was written by extremely learned men, is quite easy to understand and should serve as a gold standard for the language and size of subsequent legislation that is introduced.





Visionary Leadership


			Dynamic national leaders tend to be exceptionally good at painting a clear vision that inspires and motivates the populace. For the United States, George Washington was such a figure. He was extraordinarily brave and disciplined, and inspired confidence in his troops even though the odds of victory were often minuscule. He helped formulate the goals for our nation, which included a degree of personal freedom for all citizens, something rarely witnessed in the world previously. This understanding gave him the fortitude to resist the many calls for him to become a monarch.

			The British adversaries of General Washington were used to beating their subjects into submission and treated the colonies like many of the other colonies around the world. But they had no overarching vision, putting them at a distinct disadvantage even though they were the most powerful fighting force in the world at that time, and their opponents were an ill-equipped, ragtag bunch of militiamen.

			If today’s Americans refuse to give up on the constitutional vision, explain that vision clearly, and elect leaders who will uphold it, we will likewise defeat the powers that would bring our country down.

			Action Steps

			 				Do you have a personal vision for the rest of your life? If not, stop and write out your lifetime, one-, five-, and ten-year goals.

				Read the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.

				Examine candidates in the next election to see if any are potential visionary leaders.

				Consider whether freedom or security is most important to you. Do you see the trade-offs between the two?





ROLE MODELS



Do not carouse with drunkards and gluttons, for they are on their way to poverty. Too much sleep clothes a person with rags. Listen to your father, who gave you life, and don’t despise your mother’s experience when she is old.

			PROVERBS 23:20-22



As a child in Detroit and Boston, I had a rather limited worldview. The coolest people around were the drug dealers who drove big-finned fancy cars with huge white-walled tires, and always displayed the latest fashions, particularly in footwear and showy big straw hats. Also highly admired were the people who had risen to the rank of foreman in one of the many factories that fueled the burgeoning industrial-based economy. Most of the kids, including me, did not have a big vision of anything outside of our small world and being a dealer or foreman would have been great.

			I was never heavily drawn toward drug selling or factory work, but instead I was fascinated whenever I heard stories about doctors, especially the ones I heard in church about missionary doctors who lived amazing adventures. My family certainly was not friendly with any doctors, but at the little community hospital in our neighborhood, one could occasionally see a well-dressed and polished physician driving off in a beautiful car. I was always eager to visit a doctor even if it meant getting a shot, and I was magnetically drawn to any doctor show on television, especially Dr. Kildare, who was a general practitioner, and Dr. Ben Casey, who was a neurosurgeon.

			As mentioned earlier, in the fifth grade my academic performance was so poor that my mother (with her third-grade education) turned off the television and made us read books. I was rather disgruntled at first, but since I had no choice in the matter I began focusing on the reading so I could get my mother-required book reports done, even though she couldn’t read them, which we didn’t know. Within a matter of weeks, I began to actually know some of the answers to questions in various classes, which was shocking to the teachers and my classmates, and frankly to me as well.

			I started out reading about animals because I love nature. I then moved on to plants and minerals before discovering what really affected me: stories about people. As I read about people of great accomplishment I began to understand that success is no accident that only happens to lucky people. Instead it became clear to me that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you in life is you!

			Reading helped me realize that becoming a doctor was definitely within my grasp and that I could make this dream a reality if I was willing to invest the necessary time and effort. My vision was ever before me and buoyed me during times of discouragement. The environment can be a small factor but it pales in comparison with the power of determination to achieve a dream.

			I did not like poverty. In fact, I hated it until I began reading those books and realized that I had the power to control my own destiny and did not have to be a victim of circumstances. I know many successful people who grew up in poverty and also came to this realization sometime during their preadolescent years. What happened is that we developed a vision of what our lives could be and began to follow that vision, which required establishing plans and following them. When you have a vision, it is much easier to keep your target in sight and know when you are deviating from the plan.





Our Young People Need Vision


			I’ve discussed how necessary a shared vision is to a country. It is equally important to make sure that the young individuals in the country are given role models, providing an inspiring vision of what their lives can be. As a teenager there was a period of time when I began to “hang out” with a gang after school and into the evening. The leader of the group was older than most of the kids at school because he had failed several grades. He was an extremely cool guy who not only had brass knuckles and a knife but he also possessed a shiny .22 caliber handgun. He demonstrated such extreme confidence that many of us followed him around like little ducklings. He either possessed or had access to cars and motorcycles and he always seemed to be flush with cash. For a kid surrounded by poverty and a sense of helplessness, being around a person like this was exciting and offered a false hope of quick financial security.

			Fortunately, my fascination with his lifestyle was short-lived as I became captivated by the lives of great inventors, doctors, and explorers whom I was reading about in the library books. Once again my future was protected by academic pursuits, because that young man and many of his followers subsequently lost their lives to the violent subculture rampant in cities like Detroit.

			It is common for young people to be deceived by glamour, power, or wealth when choosing their role models. I should quickly add that some adults are also easily fooled by such things. We have a duty as parents and guardians to strive to influence which people capture our children’s imaginations. It means taking an active role in their lives and always being aware of who their friends are and what places they frequent. It also means trying to put them in the presence of people of great accomplishment whom we want them to emulate. These are things that used to be done quite routinely by caring guardians, but now many young people derive their identity from their peer group and their social network, which can be extensive.





Miley Cyrus Is Not a Role Model


			If we don’t help set role models for our children, the media will provide them—and they will not be the role models who will inspire our children to save America by living lives of wisdom, ambition, humility, and discipline.

			Many sports stars are among our young people’s heroes, but their character is often cause for concern. For example, before he died, I had an opportunity to have breakfast with Tom Landry, the famous former coach of the Dallas Cowboys. We were talking about many of the spectacular players he had coached over the years, but I was unpleasantly surprised to hear that almost all those players had borrowed money from the coach or from others and were far from leading lives of comfort and productivity. I heard exactly the same story in talking to my friend Tony Dungy, who coached the Indianapolis Colts during their glory days. Many of these players are held up before our young people as great heroes because they can throw or catch a ball or perform some other athletic feat consistently and with great flair. Entertainers similarly are extolled as superior human specimens worthy of our praise, adoration, and attention.

			Some of these people possess spectacular talent and I do not begrudge them the millions of dollars they receive for displaying those talents. I am, however, concerned about the godlike status bestowed on them when in most cases their intellectual contributions to the betterment of our society do not justify such deification. Like athletes, many entertainers are here today and gone tomorrow. It is a sad sight wandering through some of the Las Vegas casinos and seeing performers trying to get spectators to remember their glory days. I wish there were a television show that came on every day titled Lifestyles of the Formerly Rich and Famous. This would perhaps enable many of our young people to recognize the fleeting nature of some types of fame and begin to focus on developing their God-given intellectual talents so they can make a contribution to the betterment of society.

			This is not to say that we don’t need and value athletes and entertainers but we need to bring perspective to the table when talking about these kinds of careers. For example, only seven in one million will become starters in the NBA. Less than 1 percent of student athletes attending college will have a career in professional sports due to the limited number of available slots. The average career span of a professional athlete is less than five years, and only one in ten thousand makes it in a lasting way in the entertainment field. Despite these discouraging odds, thousands of people dedicate themselves to being one of the few, while often neglecting preparation for the assumption of key productive roles in society.

			More negative role models were identified in a parents’ survey taken at the time of the penning of this book. Topping the list was former Disney star Miley Cyrus, who for years gave hope to parents as a wholesome character but changed into an R-rated performer without warning in August of 2013. And Chris Brown, the singer who assaulted Rihanna, had the distinct honor of being the top worst male role model.

			Our government officials aren’t much better. According to Emily Post, for proper etiquette our high-ranking government officials are to be addressed “The Honorable.” However, with congressmen like Anthony Weiner with his sexting, former presidential candidate John Edwards’s campaign finance fraud and infidelity, and Governor Mark Sanford skipping out of the country away from his family on Father’s Day to be with a mistress, it is small wonder that our youth often have a difficult time finding their identities.

			If sports stars and entertainers and even government officials are not the optimal role models, who should we be holding up as examples for society? A role model is someone whose life is worthy of emulation. Those would be individuals who not only are successful but who also contribute to the well-being of society at large. There is nothing that says these people need to be famous and many of the best role models live right in our own houses.





My Mother: One of the Best Role Models I’ve Seen


			My mother provided for my brother and me a wonderful example of how not to be a victim. Even though the odds sometimes seemed stacked against her, she would never give up. I remember when my brother started high school they placed him in the vocational track instead of the college prep track. My mother was more than a little upset and ruffled many feathers from the local school all the way to the Board of Education of Detroit to alter that situation. I remember another time when a hit-and-run driver hit her car and sped away. She backed up the car and chased him for thirty minutes through the streets of Southwest Detroit before he finally gave up. You certainly did not have to worry about whether she could defend herself physically if she caught him, even though she was only five foot three. The example of tenacity and courage that she presented certainly was not lost on me and is a large part of who I am today.





Teachers as Role Models


			Even though my mother was a terrific role model, she did not have the wherewithal to be a good academic mentor. Fortunately, I had several teachers along the way who recognized some potential in a poor boy from the ghetto, and decided to invest much time and effort to make sure that I not only mastered my school work but also listened to quite a bit of advice they gave me about how to be successful in life. I was particularly grateful for all the tips I received about college life and how to overcome the challenges it would present. Teachers frequently get a bad rap, but good ones can mean the difference between success and failure in many lives. When they are driven by their inherent goodness rather than some of the teacher unions, their potential for doing good is almost unlimited.





The Inventor as Role Model


			When it comes to making contributions to society, inventors can serve as spectacular role models. People like Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and Elijah McCoy, an inventor of locomotive lubrication systems, had profound effects on the way we all live. African American Garrett Morgan, widely known for his innovations with the traffic light, in 1916 demonstrated the effectiveness of his invention the “Morgan Safety Hood and Smoke Protector” (now known as the gas mask) by rescuing 32 men trapped 250 feet underground in a tunnel. Prior to that event, people had scoffed at his lifesaving innovation. This invention was then utilized by the U.S. Army, saving many lives during World War I, and is now commonly used all over the world by fire and police departments, as well as the military (http://inventors.about.com/od/mstartinventors/a/Garrett_Morgan.htm). Thomas Edison was a determined inventor who knew 999 ways a lightbulb did not work. His associate, Lewis Latimer, who came up with the filament that made the bulb last for more than a few days, happened to be born in Massachusetts of escaped slaves from Virginia. Although his parents had escaped six years before Lewis was born, he was still considered a slave and his freedom had to be defended by Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison in Boston, actually purchasing his freedom himself, with the help of a local minister. After serving in the navy during the Civil War (he enlisted at age sixteen), he was honorably discharged.





Identifying Contemporary Role Models


			All the people mentioned above embody the “can-do” attitude that helped America rapidly gain power and position in the world. Unfortunately, in the current atmosphere of division and demonization of political opponents and with the ever-present influence of political correctness, it is very difficult to identify generally admired people. But it is fair to say that most people admire courage and the willingness to sacrifice in order to achieve a goal. This is why people like Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill, Ronald Reagan, and John F. Kennedy are widely admired. They all had their flaws, as is the case with every one of us, but they all faced gigantic obstacles and were victorious. People like Helen Keller, Neil Armstrong, and many war heroes also demonstrated a level of courage that most of us can only dream about. Courage is admired so much because it is lacking in so many. People of courage tend to be much less concerned about their status with other people than they are with their ability to consistently uphold principles and values. Such people frequently are not appreciated during their lifetimes, but the pages of history are frequently kind to them. It takes some degree of wisdom to be able to identify the courageous role models living and working before our very eyes.

			Action Steps

			 				Discuss heroes and role models with the young people in your life. Ask who their role models are and recommend role models discussed in this chapter.

				Discuss heroes and role models with the older people in your life and compare their answers with those of the young people. Are their role models similar or different?

				Thank one of your role models for his or her example.

				Examine your life. Could you be a role model for a younger person?





THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY



Those who follow the right path fear the Lord; those who take the wrong path despise Him.

			PROVERBS 14:2



When I was in my early teens, my brother and I acquired a BB gun. We were excited and began shooting it behind the house, using cans as targets. We were having so much fun that we didn’t think about where the errant BBs were going. The man who lived across the alley came to our home holding a screen with multiple holes in it. It looked amazingly like holes that would be made by a BB gun. We didn’t have money to replace the screen, but agreed to do some chores for our neighbor. Needless to say we stopped shooting the gun in the neighborhood.

			However, our aunt Jean and uncle William lived out in the country where there was plenty of space to shoot a BB gun and we could hardly wait to get there. One Sunday morning while we were spending the weekend with our relatives in the country, I spotted a red-winged blackbird that seemed to be an excellent target for an eagle-eyed BB gun marksman. I took careful aim at the beautiful creature sitting peacefully high above the fray in a tree. I really did not expect to hit the bird, but only seconds after I squeezed the trigger, the delicate form of the innocent creature fell lifelessly to the ground. I went over to the body and gazed at it with a combination of horror and pride. I was disgusted with myself for killing an innocent animal and I vowed never to shoot another bird and I never have.

			Was I wrong to kill that bird and did it really even matter in the whole scheme of things? No one would really miss that bird except maybe the little chicks if this happened to be their mother out looking for food. Yet I couldn’t find any way to assuage my guilt. The fact that I felt guilt obviously meant that I thought I had done something wrong—but how would I have known that? No one had ever explicitly told me not to shoot a bird, yet I had an innate sense that there was an absolute standard of morality that I had violated.





Who Says?


			What is right? What is wrong? And who gets to determine the answers to these questions? For a nation to be truly united, most of its citizens must agree on the answers to these questions—or at least agree that there are answers to be found. For years, most Americans have turned to a belief in God and the Bible for answers. From the Creation story to the Ten Commandments to the Gospels to the Epistles, the Bible provided an explanation for the meaning of life and instructed us in moral principles. We held to a Judeo-Christian standard while respecting the beliefs of those who didn’t share them, and that standard saved us from confusion. Today, fewer people believe in the Bible, or even in absolute truth, and our rejection of an objective moral standard has thrown our society into disarray. If in fact we do really believe in God and His word, many of the moral “gray” issues of today become black and white.





Abortion


			According to God’s word, life begins at conception rather than at the time of delivery or at some arbitrary point during gestation. Psalm 139:13-16 indicates that God knew the writer of these verses while he was yet unformed. In Jeremiah 1:4-5, there is an indication that God knew Jeremiah before he was born and had a special purpose for his life. This is one of several biblical passages that indicate a continuum of life that starts before birth and continues after death. In the Book of Exodus, chapter 21, verses 22–24, it is made quite clear that God considers the life of the unborn to be just as valuable as the life of an adult. When you couple this belief with the commandment, “Thou shalt not kill” (Exodus 20:13), it is clear that abortion is rarely a moral option. Add the commandment to “Love your neighbor as yourself” (Matthew 22:39), and it becomes clear that we ought to help care for mothers put in a tough place by unwanted pregnancies.

			Recently I visited a place called the Hope Center in Greenville, Tennessee, where young women with unplanned pregnancies are nurtured, mentored, and encouraged to give birth whether or not they plan to keep the baby. They make provisions for adoption if the young woman chooses not to keep the child and provide resources and support if she wants to keep the baby. They also facilitate continued education and job training for these young mothers. The center is run by a Christian organization and they are doing exactly what they should be doing. We all need to be proactive in terms of providing solutions for those in our society who have made mistakes, rather than just criticizing them. This is what it means to be truly moral people.





Homosexuality


			Another sticky moral issue is the topic of homosexuality. Many people do not understand why Christians object so strongly to gay marriage, but the answers are simply laid out in Scripture. First, several Bible verses reveal God’s disapproval of homosexual behavior. For example, Leviticus 20:13 states, “If a man practices homosexuality, having sex with another man as with a woman, both men have committed a detestable act. They must both be put to death, for they are guilty of a capital offense.” Jude 7, in the New Testament, says, “And don’t forget the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighboring towns, which were filled with sexual immorality and every kind of sexual perversion. Those cities were destroyed by fire and are a warning of the eternal fire of God’s judgment.” Second, in Ephesians 5:31-32, Paul wrote, “As the Scriptures say, ‘A man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife and the two are united into one.’ This is a great mystery, but it is an illustration of the way Christ and the church are one.” When you see that the Bible compares God’s relationship with the church to the relationship between a man and a woman in covenant marriage, it is easy to see why those who believe that marriage is an institution established by God might be less than enthusiastic about changing the definition of that institution. Some Christians may interpret the Scripture differently, but the text remains fairly clear: Condoning homosexual behavior goes directly against God’s commands. Changing the definition of marriage distorts God’s illustration of His relationship with us.

			This is not to say that God does not love homosexuals, because He most certainly does, just as He loves everyone regardless of their behavior. And Jesus died to pay the price for the shortcomings of everyone. Since there are no perfect people, no one but God has the right to judge our lives outside of criminal activity. Only He knows the minute details of every life from conception to death and can judge matters of the heart.

			However, this does not mean that we have to accept man-imposed changes to God’s word. We all make choices in life. In this matter, one can choose God’s word or the gay marriage agenda. Even though the two are not compatible, people on opposite sides of the issue do not need to be hateful toward the other side. It also should be made quite clear that upholding traditional marriage does not mean that one is a homophobe. It appears almost impossible for the gay community to understand this last point. Whether they understand it or not, it is the job of the Christian community to love everyone as God loves us.





Evolution


			Standing somewhat opposed to traditional morality is another form of religion, although its believers would never admit it. This religious belief is the theory of evolution. In this belief system, only the strong survive and there are no moral implications associated with the actions necessary to survive and thrive. As I have stated and written publicly, it might be more difficult for evolutionists to describe the basis of morality than it would be for a creationist.

			This is not to say that those who believe in evolution have no morals, but I was attacked by some biology professors at Emory University in Atlanta for allegedly saying that evolutionists were unethical. I suspected that their real objective was to drum up support for their opposition to my being invited as the commencement speaker at Emory, since I was a creationist and they didn’t think that such people had the right to be honored at an institution of higher learning. They started a petition and received many signatures, but a counterpetition received more than four times as many signatures.

			I did speak at the commencement and was received very warmly, probably to the chagrin of the intolerant instigators, one of whom subsequently sent me a note of apology stating that they had misinterpreted what I said. Obviously I was not attacking the character of evolutionists, but as is so often the case, many people who disagree with your beliefs find it more convenient to distort them than to refute them, so they can proclaim you to be an idiot.

			It is amusing to me that many in the “intellectual community” suggest that those with deeply held religious beliefs are antiscience. Many times I have heard it said of me that my opinions should not be held in high regard, because I believe that God created the earth six thousand years ago. How can anyone, they argue, with such beliefs understand anything about science and medicine, which is based on science.

			I can unequivocally state that I love science and understand and accept its basic laws. I do not know whether the earth is six thousand years old or not, and I’m not sure that such knowledge is important. The Bible says “In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.” It then goes on to describe the creation week without in any way indicating what the period of time was that elapsed between the first verse of the Bible and the start of creation week. It could have been billions of years, or it could have been less than one day. That means the earth could be billions of years old, or it could have been created in an already mature state by God six thousand years ago.

			To say that anyone believing this is stupid and nonscientific is pure demagoguery and bigotry, and certainly is uncharacteristic of a true scientist. The fact that I and millions of others believe that God created the earth and everything on it in an orderly fashion is no more antiscience than believing that something came from nothing, exploded and formed a perfectly organized solar system and universe, particularly in light of the second law of thermodynamics, which states that things tend to move toward a state of disorder. Both beliefs require faith in things that have not been proven and neither has the right to proclaim the other as foolish.

			As a doctor, I have to say that it also requires a great deal of faith to believe that an organ system as complex as the kidney or the eye formed through the process of natural selection, which states that things that are not useful to an organ simply disappear, whereas things that are useful are genetically passed on to the next generation. There are many components to organs like the kidney or the eye that are useless without all the other components and, therefore, according to the theory of evolution, should not be passed on to the next generation. In fact, according to the theory of evolution, without invoking all kinds of convolutions to the theory, it is impossible for any complex organ system to exist unless it just spontaneously formed overnight. That sounds crazy to me, but then again, if you believe that matter can form from nonmatter, I guess you can believe an eyeball can form overnight.

			My understanding of science has not precluded my pursuit of a career as a successful neurosurgeon. The claims of some in the scientific community that belief in the theory of evolution is the foundation of all science is pure and unadulterated fantasy. Belief in evolution is just as much associated with religion as belief in creation. They both require faith, either in God or in man.

			Unlike godly principles that are uniting in nature, many who believe in the evolutionary approach drive wedges between people by insisting that all intelligent people believe as they do and that anyone with a different belief leaves something to be desired intellectually.

			An interesting question that frequently arises during these kinds of discussions is whether or not animals are capable of distinguishing right from wrong. Is it wrong for a lion to kill an innocent lamb or even to kill a human being when it is hungry or even when it is just being a vicious killer? If evolutionary theory is true, nothing should separate humans from animals.

			Yet, surprisingly, these kinds of questions are much easier to answer when we are dealing with people as opposed to animals. Unlike animals, we have gigantic frontal lobes in our brains that allow us to extract information from the past and the present, and then formulate a plan that can be projected into the future to guide our actions. We do not simply have to react to the environment, but can actually alter the environment to satisfy our needs. We have reasoning abilities that far exceed those of animals and our behavior, once we mature, is generally based on choices. Some may say that this impressive ability evolved, but I prefer to think we were given it on purpose. Either way, human beings have a sense of morality that does not jibe with evolutionary theory. It is legitimate to ask the question, “Where did our sense of morality come from?” Even if you enter the deepest, darkest jungles of Borneo, you will find that a thief tends to ply his trade in the darkness, when there is no one around to see him. This is even the case when there have been no missionaries in the area and no Bible to read. All people inherently seem to understand some basic principles of right and wrong. It is much easier to see such morality as God given than trying to explain how it evolved. But everyone is entitled to their beliefs.

			Have you ever noticed how difficult it is to sit by and watch someone suffer? Almost everyone will try to help someone who is drowning. That might mean jumping into the water to save her, throwing her a lifesaver, trying to reach her with a pole, or calling for help. As a human being, this is your duty, because you certainly would want someone to do that for you. As an evolutionist who is also an atheist, your “survival-of-the-fittest” mentality should lead you to just walk on by, but of course your deep-seated humanity would not allow such callous behavior in most cases.

			So where does that deep-seated humanity come from? Where did my conviction that wantonly killing an innocent bird was wrong come from? Has it evolved, or is it possible that if we are made in the image of God, there is an innate sense of right and wrong that we all share as human beings? I believe there is good evidence for the latter.

			There are no people anywhere that I know of who don’t have a sense of right and wrong. Even a cursory reading of the Bible demonstrates that people certainly knew the difference between right and wrong before the time of the Ten Commandments. It was the outrageous behavior of the Israelites that necessitated the physical writing out of a behavioral code, despite the powerful evidences of God in their lives.

			I do not believe it to be necessary for us to all agree on the source of morality as long as we agree on the basic principles of what is right and what is wrong. I believe there is general agreement that lying, stealing, and murdering are wrong. There is probably less agreement about what constitutes adultery and whether it is wrong, especially in the nonchurch community. Nevertheless, our guiding principle should be to help rather than harm our fellow man. Doing so earns God’s blessing.





Are We “Under God”?


			In America we claim to believe in God and in fact proclaim our trust in Him on every piece of our money. Many of our laws are based on the Ten Commandments, and in the bas relief crown molding that adorns the principal chamber of the U.S. Supreme Court, Moses and the tablets containing the Ten Commandments are depicted. Yet we take great pains to delete references to God and the Bible from all public spaces, especially our schools and municipal buildings. We seem to be having a difficult time determining whether we actually believe in God or whether it is something that we have gotten used to saying in a pro forma manner without actually thinking about our words.

			The words under God were not in the original version of the Pledge of Allegiance. They were subsequently added to signify the importance of God in every aspect of our lives. Admittedly, the acknowledgment of God in virtually everything we do does not show a great deal of respect for atheists and others who do not harbor traditional views of God, but as the Bible says, you cannot serve both God and man. This does not mean we must force others to believe what we do, but it does mean we have to make a choice as to what we believe and form our societal values around that choice.

			In no way does choosing God mean that we need to be unkind to nonbelievers. It is contrary to the American way to force our beliefs on anyone else. By the same token, it is most unreasonable for atheists to make attempts to legally force Christians and their beliefs underground. The persistent attempts by some atheist groups to have the words under God removed from our pledge or the phrase “In God we trust” removed from our money should be tolerated because we believe in being fair to everyone, but it is the height of absurdity to seriously consider such challenges in a country where religious freedom and freedom of worship are guaranteed.

			Interestingly enough, we in the United States have had many manifestations of God’s mercy and favor throughout history. In August of 1776, General George Washington and eight thousand troops were trapped on Long Island with British General Howe preparing to crush them the next morning. The island was surrounded by the British armada. Desperately, Washington drafted every local seaworthy vessel available, from fishing boats to rowboats, in an attempt to ferry his army across the East River all through the night. At dawn, many of his troops were still in grave danger by their exposure to the huge British fleet. However, most curiously, the fog that usually would rise from the river once the sun rose, did not move. It remained dense long enough for all of Washington’s men to escape to safety. This had been the British’s best opportunity to clinch the victory over the Americans. Major Ben Tallmadge, who was Washington’s chief of intelligence, wrote of that morning:


As the dawn of the next day approached, those of us who remained in the trenches became very anxious for our own safety, and when the dawn appeared there were several regiments still on duty. At this time a very dense fog began to rise [out of the ground and off the river], and it seemed to settle in a peculiar manner over both encampments. I recollect this peculiar providential occurrence perfectly well, and so very dense was the atmosphere that I could scarcely discern a man at six yards distance . . . we tarried until the sun had risen, but the fog remained as dense as ever.

			Like the Israelites in the Bible, we have wandered away from our strong belief in God and many of us now don’t seem to know what we believe. Church attendance is steadily declining, especially among the millennials; traditional families are rapidly becoming a rarity; and many of the things forbidden by God are spreading like wildfire. Traditionally, once a nation starts down the path of lack of identity and vision for the future, it is destroyed, or deteriorates from within, losing most or all of its relevance to the world.

			Although we appear to be sliding downward, it is possible for us to reverse the trend, even though we are composed of many people with lots of different ideas about morality. It may be hard to agree on the origin of morality but it should not be hard to agree that that sense of morality, should guide our decision making and determine what kind of society we have. As human beings we have a strong sense of right and wrong. As Americans, we have a heritage of Judeo-Christian morality. Let’s remember who we are and unite around the vision dictated by our identity.

			Action Steps

			 				Ask your associates whether they believe absolute right or wrong exists.

				Ask your friends whether they would be okay with polygamy if most people said it was okay with them.

				Determine the basis for your moral code. Ask your friends how they have determined theirs.

				If you believe God to be the author of morality, consider how you can better cultivate a relationship with Him.





TAKE COURAGE



Those who fear the Lord are secure; He will be a place of refuge for their children.

			PROVERBS 14:26



The power of a determined human being who is not willing to give up is truly inspirational. I have been inspired over the years by many of my patients who have had absolutely devastating diseases. One young lady has endured over one hundred operations and was near death on many occasions, but persevered and graduated from high school in June 2013. Another patient, Mandy, who is well into adulthood now, has faced death on numerous occasions while remaining cheerful, upbeat, and unafraid. She is wheelchair bound and has significant weakness of the upper extremities along with other serious issues, but she will never give up, and even completed a college degree.

			The question is do the people of this nation have the determination, drive, and willpower to seize the reins of power and return the country to its place as a beacon of light and inspiration for the world? A nation that is powerful, yet benign? Do we have the courage to stand up for what we believe or will we continue to cower in the corner and hope no one sees us?

			One way to develop courage is to consider what will happen if we fail to act. When considering action, I always do a best/worst analysis. I ask the following four questions about the prospective action:

			 				What’s the best thing that happens if I do it?

				What’s the worst thing that happens if I do it?

				What’s the best thing that happens if I don’t do it?

				What’s the worst thing that happens if I don’t do it?



			Let’s consider these questions with respect to being courageous enough to go against the flow of political correctness and demand your constitutional rights. What is the best thing that happens if we refuse to abide by the dictates of political correctness? I believe that we could return to a nation that truly cherishes freedom of speech and freedom of expression. A nation where people are unafraid to express their opinions and beliefs and are eager to engage in intelligent and constructive conversations about their differences. A nation where we value even those with whom we disagree and work together to accomplish common goals.

			What is the worst thing that happens if we oppose political correctness? I believe that every attempt would be made to silence those who oppose political correctness and to make examples of them to discourage others. World history demonstrates that it is very difficult to eradicate every single fighter for freedom.

			What is the best thing that happens if we don’t oppose political correctness? I believe we would achieve a very homogeneous society with little original thought but complete harmony. What is the worst thing that happens if we don’t oppose political correctness? I believe we could see a dictatorship with brutal domination of any individual or group that opposes the leadership. The worst things that can happen if we don’t take action are considerably worse than the worst things that can happen if we do take action. Therefore, we must take action.

			This exercise guided me as I considered topics for the National Prayer Breakfast. As it turns out, one of the better outcomes was achieved, because I have encountered thousands of Americans who had given up on our country, and now are reinvigorated and ready to stand up for the freedoms that are guaranteed in our Constitution.

			There is no freedom without bravery. As a society, are we free if we tolerate intimidation by government agencies like the IRS? Are we free if we allow the NSA to illegally search and seize our private documents without cause? Are we free if we allow the purveyors of political correctness to muzzle our thoughts and our speech? Are we free if we allow ourselves to be forcibly placed into an ill-conceived health care system that controls the most important thing we have: our lives? Are we free when our government controls every aspect of the business community and stifles the entrepreneurial spirit that built America? We are in the process of relinquishing the freedom that is America. Are we really brave if we allow all these things to occur and keep silent because we’re afraid that someone will call us a name?

			Freedom is not reserved for those unwilling to fight for it. When you see the American flag, think about George Washington, who fought alongside his men and led a ragtag bunch of militiamen to a victory over what was then the most powerful empire in the world. Remember Alexander Hamilton, who used his financial wizardry to establish a viable financial structure for a fledgling nation. Consider John Adams and Sam Adams, who were willing to give not only of their resources but also tirelessly of their efforts to establish an understandable legal foundation for our nation. Honor the millions of soldiers who fought and died to preserve our freedom when the world was threatened by tyranny. Revere Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and his dream of a nation where people were judged by the content of their character and not by the color of their skin. Imitate Henry Ford and Dale Carnegie, who used their entrepreneurial talents not only to enrich themselves but to provide a mechanism to proliferate and empower the middle class in America.

			Why did all of these people toil so relentlessly for an idea? It is because they had a dream of a nation that was different from any other; a nation where people could determine their own destiny and choose their lifestyle based on their own endeavors; a nation where people could choose how to disperse their own wealth after contributing a small, but reasonable amount of their resources to conduct the affairs of government. Through complacency, are we ready to throw away their ideas and the results of their labors?

			Our nation was formed by men and women of tremendous courage. If we think about it, I’m sure that each of us can remember numerous brave individuals whom we have encountered throughout life. I am aware of a multitude of my physician colleagues who have stood on principle and faced expensive and embarrassing public malpractice suits when they could have simply settled the case in secret. These courageous individuals refused to be blamed for bad outcomes when they not only did nothing wrong but had gone the extra mile to try to ensure the patient’s well-being. Each such fight will get us closer to badly needed tort reform in our country.

			When I was in high school, it was not uncommon for some of the tougher boys to intimidate and control many of the teachers. I was in the marching band and the concert band led by Mr. Dee. He was a short but stocky young man who refused to yield to intimidation. One of the boys who was particularly brutal repeatedly challenged Mr. Dee’s leadership and many verbal confrontations ensued. One day after a practice session, Mr. Dee publicly challenged the belligerent young man to back up his verbosity. The two of them remained in the band room after everyone had left and I never knew what actually happened, but I did notice that the troublemaker never challenged Mr. Dee again. This example of courage was not lost on all the other students and demonstrates how teachers can be an important influence on students even outside of their area of expertise.

			I have seen numerous examples of courageous patients and families throughout my career. In one case a young family from the western half of our nation had been told that their infant boy had only six months to live after a biopsy at the university hospital proved consistent with a malignant brain stem tumor. With help they made their way to Johns Hopkins Hospital where I performed a series of operations that would have been considered futile by many. The family never lost faith and endured many hardships, but had the courage and fortitude to persist in their efforts to save their child. A few years ago I was giving a lecture at the university in the home state of that patient and I was approached after the lecture by a young man and his family. It turned out to be the same young man on whom I had operated when he was an infant and he was now a junior at the university and had no neurological deficits. I feel confident in saying that he would not have been alive without the courage and persistence of his family. There are plenty of courageous people out there who can inspire all of us to undertake difficult tasks in order to achieve a better future.

			The next time you hear the national anthem, think about what it means: “Oh, say does that star-spangled banner yet wave / O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?” We are still the home of the brave, and it is time for us to stand up and preserve our flag and our freedoms.





		 			EPILOGUE




We all have a tendency to assume that our day-to-day routines will continue as usual without catastrophes. I certainly made that assumption on March 20, 2012.

			I was driving to work and was one block away from the hospital, entering an intersection with the green light in my favor. Another driver ran the red light on the perpendicular street going sixty miles per hour. Our cars met in the intersection and the next thing I knew there were flashing lights, police, and medics all around. My air bags had deployed and my car was completely destroyed.

			I was relieved as I examined myself and found only a few minor scrapes and abrasions, as well as some chest discomfort from the explosive force of the steering air bag. My cell phone was broken, but an officer lent me his phone so I could call my wife. I also called the operating room to let them know that I would be slightly delayed, but intended to get there in time to complete the operations that were scheduled that morning. I convinced the officials that I was okay, and one of the police officers pried open the trunk to retrieve my briefcase. He then drove me the rest of the way to the hospital, where I completed three operations without incident.

			Since that experience, I have frequently thought about how lucky I was to have not been killed or seriously injured that day. I keep a picture of the mangled mass that used to be my car on my phone to remind me of how fleeting life can be. Tomorrow is not guaranteed to any of us, and if something needs to be done, it is usually best to just go ahead and do it, rather than engage in endless cogitation with no action.

			If we are not an exceptional nation, we can quietly continue our slide into insignificance, but if this is the America of Washington, Franklin, Lincoln, Kennedy, Edison, Ford, King, and the millions who gave their lives for our freedom, then we must shake off the indifference that has gradually stolen our pride and our freedom and threatens the future of our children. We must exercise our duty as responsible and informed citizens and actively shape the nation we desire by investing time, resources, and energy into choosing appropriate leaders who share our vision. In some cases, we may even need to offer ourselves as candidates for public office.

			Who knows what tomorrow holds for each of us and for our nation? We have no time to waste. Today is the day to act. Resolve to take one step toward helping our nation return to greatness. If we all do so, we cannot fail to remain “one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”





The New Beginning





		 			ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




Many thanks to those who made this book possible, including Sealy Yates, Adrian Zackheim, Bria Sandford, Will Weisser, Washington Speakers Bureau, Audrey Jones, Stephanie Marshall, my many medical colleagues and patients, Armstrong Williams, and Xavier Underwood.





		 			INDEX


			The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader.



			abortion, 3, 175

			morality and, 193–94

			pro-life vs. pro-choice arguments on, 100–101

			academic bullies, 89–90

			ACLU, 56

			Adams, John, 40–41, 207

			Adams, Sam, 207

			adult day care centers, 155

			Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), 3, 12–13, 64–65, 71, 74, 75, 142, 143, 147–48, 172–73, 206

			African American communities:

			education and, 31, 33–34, 51

			elite class and, 30, 31–34

			leadership in, 43

			out of wedlock births in, 31

			African American-owned businesses, 32

			ageism, 58–59

			Alaska, 1–2

			Alinsky, Saul, 14–15, 20, 23, 24, 25, 39

			Al Qaeda, 135

			American colonies, 93–94, 179

			American flag, xxiv–xxv, 206–7, 209

			American Revolution, 93, 170, 171, 177

			America the Beautiful (Carson and Carson), xvi–xvii

			Anderson, Marian, 42

			Armistead, George, xxiv

			Armstrong, Neil, 189

			atheists, 175, 199, 201

			athletes, 184–86

			Australia, 146

			AZM (azinphos-methyl), 89



			bald eagle, xxiii

			banks, xxi

			Benghazi, 135

			Berea College, 135

			bestiality, 18, 19

			best/worst analysis in considering actions, 205–6

			Bible, 28, 40, 200, 201

			and caring for others, 157

			Carson’s National Prayer Breakfast speech and, xi

			Chronicles, xi, 34

			Creation story in, 192, 196–97, 198

			Ephesians, 194

			Exodus, 193

			James, 151

			Jeremiah, 193

			Jude, 194

			Leviticus, 194

			Matthew, 193

			morality and, 192–95, 199, 200

			Proverbs, xi, 1, 11, 26, 35, 48, 62, 72, 85, 96, 98, 108, 111, 121, 122, 124, 138, 140, 148, 151, 152, 169, 171, 181, 191, 204

			Psalms, 193

			Solomon in, 139–40

			tithing in, xxi, 104, 120

			Biden, Joe, xi

			bigotry, 3, 48–61, 86, 197

			action steps for, 61

			ageist, 58–59

			defeating, 60–61

			homophobia, 60, 195

			racial, see racism

			religious, 53–57

			sexist, 17, 57–58

			Bill of Rights, xvii, 54

			First Amendment, 41, 55

			Second Amendment, 109–10, 175

			Bin Laden, Osama, 135

			birth control, 67

			births out of wedlock, 31

			black communities, see African American communities

			Black Panthers, 27

			books, 133–34

			Carson’s reading during childhood, xv, 134, 182, 183, 184

			brain:

			information and, 125–26

			morality and, 198–99

			Brown, Chris, 186

			bullies, bullying, 5, 85–97

			academic, 89–90

			action steps for, 97

			in business, 90–91

			consequences of giving in to, 94

			gaining respect of, 86, 95–96

			media, 86–87, 97

			political, 87–89, 97

			political correctness and, 86, 93

			in school, 5, 85–86, 95–96, 169–70

			unintentional, 91–93

			bullies, pushing back against, 96–97

			heritage of courage and, 93–94

			peacefulness and consistency in, 95

			Bush, George W., 15, 135

			business, bullies in, 90–91



			can-do attitude, 7, 29, 176, 189

			capitalism, 154

			caring for others, 152–65

			action steps for, 165

			charities and, 146, 154, 161, 165

			churches and, 146, 161, 162, 165

			compassion and, 157, 164–65

			the disabled, 152–53, 155, 156

			the elderly, 153, 154–56, 165

			government dependency and, 153, 156, 157–58

			irresponsible people and, 146, 163–64

			minimum-wage jobs and, 158–60

			people (not government) helping people, 161–63

			the poor, 153, 157

			socialism vs. capitalism and, 154

			Carnegie, Dale, 207

			Carson, Ben:

			Alaska trip of, 1–2

			aunt and uncle of, 152–53, 191

			BB gun of, 191–92, 199

			book reading during childhood, xv, 134, 182, 183, 184

			in car accident, 210–11

			conjoined twins cases and, 91–93, 140

			early jobs of, 158–60

			as highway cleanup crew supervisor, 62–63, 159

			as intern, 16–17

			medical career of, 151, 159–60, 181–83, 198, 204, 208

			at medical school, 138–39

			mountain climbing experience of, 76, 77

			National Prayer Breakfast (1997) speech of, ix, x

			National Prayer Breakfast (2013) speech of, ix–xxvi, 18, 143, 206

			poverty in upbringing of, xiv, xv, xvi, 183

			in school in Detroit, xiv, 35–36, 48, 50, 85, 95–96, 114, 182

			temper of, xiv, 21, 107–8, 140

			as X-ray technician, 159

			at Yale University, 26–27

			Carson, Candy (Ben’s wife), xvi, xvii, 125, 141, 153, 170

			Carson, Curtis (Ben’s brother), 48, 124, 140–41, 187, 191

			Carson, Sonya (Ben’s mother), xiv–xv, 49, 111–12

			book reading and, xv, 134, 182, 183

			as role model, 187

			wisdom of, 140–41, 142, 150

			Carson Scholars Fund, xvii–xviii, xix, 98–99

			Carver, George Washington, 30

			“Census Bureau Links Poverty with Out-of-Wedlock Births” (Nelson), 31

			character, questioning of or attempts to destroy, 21, 67

			charity, 146, 154, 161, 165

			China, 75–76

			Christian crusaders, 53

			Christianity, 53–54

			Dark Ages and, 178

			as U.S. heritage, 40–41, 192, 203

			see also Bible; God; Jesus Christ

			Christian Right, 56

			Christmas, 54, 55

			“Merry Christmas,” xii, 41, 56, 91

			Chronicles, xi, 34

			churches, 146, 161, 162, 165, 202

			Churchill, Winston, 189

			Civil War, 33, 189

			classical music, 124–25

			Clinton, Bill, ix, x, 56, 78, 115

			Clinton, Hillary, x

			College of the Ozarks, 135–36

			colonies, American, 93–94, 179

			“Coming Home” program, 161–62

			common sense, 3, 6, 23, 29, 59, 117, 118, 121, 129, 139, 141, 149

			and compassion for the poor, 157

			knowledge and, 142

			Obamacare and, 147–48

			voter identification cards and, 4

			see also wisdom

			communal societies, 173, 174

			communication, 13–14

			political correctness’s stifling of, 13–14, 17–18, 19

			compassion:

			for the poor, 157

			true, 164–65

			compromise, 111–23

			action steps for, 122–23

			on gay marriage, 116–17

			on national debt, 117–21

			pride and, 116, 121–22, 123

			recent examples of, 114–16

			starting small in, 114

			timing and, 113

			computers, 129, 136

			Congress, 54, 56, 63, 65, 127

			Congressional Franking Committee, 56

			Constitution, xvii, 37–38, 39–41, 77, 170, 180, 206

			Bill of Rights, xvii, 54

			drifting away from, 172, 174

			First Amendment, 41, 55

			religion and, 40–41, 53, 54, 55

			revering, 176–77

			Second Amendment, 109–10, 175

			as vision, 170–72, 179

			voting for those who uphold, 177–79, 180

			constitutional convention, 176

			courage, 6, 13, 189, 204–9

			best/worst analysis and, 205–6

			heritage of, 93–94

			Creation, 192, 196–97, 198

			criminal justice system, 32

			Cronkite, Walter, 29

			Cyrus, Miley, 186



			Dark Ages, 178

			debt:

			national, see national debt

			personal, 72–73, 80, 81, 118

			Declaration of Independence, xvii, 142, 180

			demagoguery, 67

			Democrats, 63, 68, 69, 78, 177

			fighting between Republicans and, see political fighting

			Detroit, Mich., 26, 33, 48–50, 124, 181, 184

			Carson as highway cleanup supervisor in, 62–63, 159

			Carson in school in, xiv, 35–36, 48, 50, 85, 95–96, 114

			Detroit Tigers, 69–70

			disabled, caring for, 152–53, 155, 156

			disagreement, 110

			respectful, see respectful disagreement, 98–100

			dividers, 86, 189

			tactics of, 66–67

			dogs, xii, 11–12

			dollar, value of, 74–75

			Douglass, Frederick, 33, 188–89

			driving a hard bargain, 112

			drone strikes, 135

			Dungy, Tony, 185



			eagle, xxiii

			economic independence, 32

			economy, 142

			growth of, 75–76, 119

			Edison, Thomas, 188, 211

			education, xiii–xiv, xvi–xix, 3, 6, 43, 136–37, 177–78

			basic knowledge in, 131–32

			of blacks, 31, 33–34, 51

			Carson Scholars Fund and, xvii–xviii, xix, 98–99

			at College of the Ozarks, 135–36

			in 1800s, xvi–xvii, 40, 126

			as foundation of our government, 126–27

			prosperity and, 132–33

			Title I and, xix, 98–99

			wisdom and, 141

			of young black women, 31

			see also informed citizens; knowledge

			Edwards, John, 186

			Egypt, 3, 46, 53

			Einstein, Albert, 189

			elderly:

			bigotry and, 50, 58

			caring for, 153, 154–56, 165

			electronic medical records (EMRs), xxii, 143

			elites, elitism, 3, 26–34, 51, 86

			action steps for, 34

			arrogance of, 28–29

			escaping subservience to, 31–34

			in Ivy Leagues, 26–27

			media and, 28

			minority communities oppressed by, 29–30

			secular progressive, 28

			Emory University, 196

			emotional trauma, 22–23

			EMRs (electronic medical records), xxii, 143

			enemies, 96–97

			see also bullies, bullying

			energy, 149–50

			England, 3, 23, 170, 171

			entertainers, 185

			entitlements, 29, 40, 81, 117

			entrepreneurship, 119, 172, 206, 207

			environment, 89, 149, 150

			Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 149

			Ephesians, 194

			evolution, 195–200

			Exodus, 193

			experts, wisdom and, 141–42



			failures:

			admitting, 151

			blaming others for, 148

			families, 30, 202

			fast and furious scandal, 135

			federal budget, 65–66, 115

			balanced, 78

			deficit in, xx, 73, 78, 80, 121

			surplus in, 78

			see also national debt

			First Amendment, 41, 55

			flag of the United States, xxiv–xxv, 206–7, 209

			Florida Atlantic University, 90

			food stamps, 29

			Ford, Henry, 188, 207, 211

			Ford Motors, 158

			forgetfulness, see ignorance and forgetfulness

			Fort McHenry, xxiv

			founders, xvii, 2, 6, 37–38, 56, 136, 170–71, 176, 177

			Constitution and, see Constitution

			Declaration of Independence and, xvii, 142, 180

			education and, 126

			freedom of speech and, 23–24

			historical revisionism and, 37–38

			religion and, 40–41

			Franklin, Benjamin, 171, 211

			freedom, xiii, 38, 58, 97, 170, 172, 176, 178, 179, 180, 205–7, 209

			freedom of choice, 12–13

			freedom of speech, 205, 206

			founders and, 23–24

			political correctness and, 12, 19, 23–24

			free market, 154, 173



			gangs, 49, 183

			Garrison, William Lloyd, 188–89

			gas masks, 188

			Gates, Bill, Jr., 141

			GDP (gross domestic product), 74

			GE College Bowl, 124

			Germany, Nazi, 94

			Gingrich, Newt, 115

			Glass-Steagall Act, 44

			God, xxi, 28, 42, 49, 54, 107, 121, 140, 175, 200–201

			“In God We Trust” phrase, 55, 200

			morality and, 192–95, 199–203

			in Pledge of Allegiance, 3, 55, 60–61, 201, 211

			wisdom of, 151

			world created by, 192, 196–97, 198

			see also religion

			government:

			expansion of, 38, 93, 121, 176

			reducing size of, 79, 121

			surveillance by, 135

			utopian vision and, 172–74

			government dependency, 42, 52, 153, 156, 157–58, 172, 175

			people helping people vs., 161–63

			see also welfare

			government employees, 162–63

			government officials, 186

			Graham, Billy, ix

			Graham, Franklin, 162

			Great Britain, 3, 23, 170, 171

			Greece:

			ancient, 3, 77

			modern, 73

			gross domestic product (GDP), 74

			guns, 109–10, 175



			Hale, Nathan, 23

			Hamilton, Alexander, 207

			Haymarket Square, 113

			health care, xxi–xxii, 29, 70, 172

			catastrophic insurance in, 145

			electronic medical records (EMRs) in, xxii, 143

			health savings accounts (HSAs) in, xxii, 143–47

			malpractice cases and, 102–3, 146–47, 207–8

			Medicare and, 113

			Obamacare (Affordable Care Act), 3, 12–13, 64–65, 71, 74, 75, 142, 143, 147–48, 172–73, 206

			third-party insurance-based, 144

			vision for a wiser system, 142–48

			Henry, Patrick, 23

			heroes, 189, 190

			see also role models

			Higgins Elementary School, 48

			historical revisionism, 37–40, 43, 47, 51, 86

			history repeating itself, 43–46

			Hitler, Adolf, 94

			Holocaust, 94

			homosexuality, 12

			gay marriage and, 3, 18–20, 60, 116–17, 175, 194–95

			homophobia and, 60, 195

			morality and, 194–95

			Hope Center, 193–94

			Howe, William, 201

			humility, 106–8, 122

			wisdom and, 150–51

			hypersensitivity, 13, 14–15, 23, 24

			faux, 17–20, 25



			ignorance and forgetfulness, 35–47

			action steps for, 46–47

			of Christian heritage, 40–41

			dangers of, 129–30

			historical revisionism, 37–40, 43, 47, 51, 86

			and history repeating itself, 43–46

			King’s advice and, 42–43

			in medicine, 36

			information:

			brain and, 125–26

			sources of, 133–34

			see also knowledge

			informed citizens, 124–37

			action steps for, 137

			basic knowledge for, 131–32

			dangers of ignorance, 129–30

			and education as the foundation of our government, 126–27

			Internet and, 129, 133

			manipulators and, 134–35

			voting and, 126, 127–28, 130, 131

			see also education; knowledge

			insurance companies, 64

			Internet, 129, 133

			inventors, 188–89

			Iran, 46, 53

			Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, 115

			Iraqi war, 135

			irresponsible people, 146, 163–64

			IRS (Internal Revenue Service), 24, 68, 117, 135, 143, 206

			Islamic extremists, 53

			isolationism, 45

			Israel, 43–44

			Israelites, 200, 202

			Ivy Leagues, 26–27



			Jackson, Andrew, 78

			James, Book of, 151

			Jefferson, Thomas, 59, 174

			Jeremiah, Book of, 193

			Jesus Christ, xx, 42, 53–54, 90, 195

			Johns Hopkins Hospital’s statue of, 54–55

			Jews, 50

			jobs, minimum-wage, 158–60

			Jobs, Steve, 141

			Johns Hopkins Hospital, 57, 208

			Carson as intern at, 16–17

			conjoined twins at, 91–93, 140

			statue of Jesus at, 54–55

			Johns Hopkins School of Education, 19

			Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 18–19

			Jude, Book of, 194



			Keller, Helen, 42, 189

			Kennedy, John F., 189, 211

			Key, Francis Scott, xxiv

			King, Martin Luther, Jr., 39, 46, 207, 211

			forgetting advice of, 42–43

			King, Martin Luther, Sr., 30

			knowledge, 128, 150

			basic, 131–32, 133

			brain and, 125–26

			common sense and, 142

			sources of, 133–34

			wisdom and, 138–39, 141

			see also education; informed citizens; wisdom

			Kuwait, 115



			labor force participation, 44, 160

			Landry, Tom, 184–85

			Latimer, Lewis, 188–89

			lawyers, xvii

			leadership:

			in black community, 43

			visionary, 179, 180

			learning from mistakes, 148–49, 151

			Leno, Jay, 6

			Leviticus, 194

			liberal universities, 64, 89–90

			libraries, xix, 99

			Carson’s use of, xv, 134, 184

			lightbulbs, 188

			Lincoln, Abraham, 211

			listening, 106–8, 110



			Madison, James, xxiv

			malpractice cases, 102–3, 146–47, 207–8

			manners, 5–6, 12

			marriage, 18, 194–95

			gay, 3, 18–20, 60, 116–17, 175, 194–95

			Martin, Trayvon, 52

			Matthew, Book of, 193

			McCoy, Elijah, 188

			Mead, Margaret, 89

			media, 4, 15, 18, 23, 28–29, 34, 46

			bias in, 133

			bullies in, 86–87, 97

			elite class and, 28

			manipulators in, 134–35

			Medicare, 113

			medicine:

			defensive, 102–3, 146–47, 207–8

			knowledge in, 36

			see also health care

			memory, 36, 88

			see also ignorance and forgetfulness

			Middle East, 43–44

			minimum-wage jobs, 158–60

			minority communities:

			elite oppression of, 29–30

			see also African American communities

			mistakes, 164, 194

			learning from, 148–49, 151

			money, 74–75

			“In God We Trust” on, 55, 200

			Montgomery bus boycott, 91

			morality, 3, 40, 191–203

			abortion and, 193–94

			action steps for, 203

			in animals, 198–99

			Bible and, 192–95, 199, 200

			brain and, 198–99

			evolution and, 195–200

			God and, 192–95, 199–203

			homosexuality and, 194–95

			Morgan, Garrett, 188

			Moses, 200

			music, classical, 124–25

			“my way or the highway” attitude, 64–65, 112, 117, 121



			NAMBLA (North American Man/Boy Love Association), 18

			name-calling, 5

			nanny state, 173

			national anthem, 209

			national debt, xx, 3, 59, 72–81, 101

			action steps for, 80–81

			compromise on, 117–21

			economic growth and, 75–76, 119

			government assistance and, 155, 156

			raising ceiling for, 79

			see also federal budget

			National Prayer Breakfast (1997), ix, x

			National Prayer Breakfast (2013), ix–xxvi, 18, 143, 206

			Nazism, 12, 94

			Nelson, Steven, 31

			NSA (National Security Agency), 206

			nursing homes, 155, 156



			Obama, Michelle, x, xi

			Obama, Barack, 64, 117, 135

			at National Prayer Breakfast, x–xi, xxv

			Obamacare (Affordable Care Act), 3, 12–13, 64–65, 71, 74, 75, 142, 143, 147–48, 172–73, 206

			Occupy Wall Street movement, 40, 80

			offense, 5, 13

			feigned, 15, 17–20, 21–22, 25

			oil, 149

			“Operation Heal Our Patriots” program, 162

			organizations, bullying by, 90–91



			Palisades Park, 55

			Paul, Saint, 194

			Pelosi, Nancy, 64

			pinnacle nations, 3, 39, 176

			isolationism and, 45

			Pledge of Allegiance, 3, 55, 60–61, 201, 211

			political bullies, 87–89, 97

			political correctness, xii, xiii, xx, xxv, 3, 6, 11–25, 189

			action steps for, 25

			best/worst analysis of actions toward, 205–6

			bullying and, 86, 93

			dialogue stifled by, 13–14, 17–18, 19

			faux hypersensitivity and, 17–20, 21–22, 25

			freedom of speech and, 12, 19, 23–24

			hypersensitivity and, 13, 14–15, 23, 24

			true sensitivity and, 15–16

			true wounds and, 22–23

			political correctness police (PCP), 12–13, 25, 86

			responding to, 20–22

			political fighting, 62–71

			action steps for, 71

			division tactics in, 66–67

			“my way or the highway” approach and, 64–65, 112, 117, 121

			strength in unity vs., 69–71

			“we the people” vs. “they the government” and, 68–69

			Post, Emily, 186

			poverty, 3, 30, 183

			caring for the poor, 153, 157

			Carson’s experience with, xiv, xv, xvi, 183

			prayer, 56, 151, 171

			presidential election of 2012, 69, 130

			pride, 116, 121–22, 123

			prioritizing, 149–50, 151

			Proverbs, xi, 1, 11, 26, 35, 48, 62, 72, 85, 96, 98, 108, 111, 121, 122, 124, 138, 140, 148, 151, 152, 169, 171, 181, 191, 204

			Psalms, 193



			quoting out of context, 67



			racism, 17, 39, 50–53

			Carson’s internship and, 16–17

			Montgomery bus boycott and, 91

			Ravella, Dawn, 162

			Reagan, Ronald, 189

			Reformed Church, 161–62

			religion:

			bigotry and, 53–57

			and caring for others, 162, 165

			Constitution and, 40–41, 53, 54, 55

			see also Christianity; God

			Republicans, 63, 68, 69, 78, 177

			fighting between Democrats and, see political fighting

			respectful disagreement, 98–100, 113

			on abortion, 100–101

			action steps for, 110

			humility and a listening ear in, 106–8, 110, 122

			strategies for, 108–10

			on taxation, 103–6

			on tort reform, 102–3

			on welfare, 101–2

			retirement, 164

			Rihanna, 186

			role models, 181–90

			action steps for, 190

			Carson’s mother as, 187

			courageous, 189

			identifying, 189

			inventors as, 188–89

			negative, 184–86

			teachers as, 187–88

			for young people, 183–87, 190

			Rome, xx, 3, 73

			Roosevelt, Franklin D., 42, 75

			Rules for Radicals (Alinsky), 14–15, 25



			sacrifice, 79

			Saddam Hussein, 115

			Samaritan’s Purse, 162

			Sanford, Mark, 186

			schools, 132, 133

			bullies in, 5, 85–86, 95–96, 169–70

			Title I, xix, 98–99

			see also education

			Schumer, Chuck, xi

			science, 196–97

			evolution theory in, 195–200

			Second Amendment, 109–10, 175

			secular progressives, 3, 6–7, 13, 136

			character destruction attempts by, 21

			elite, 28

			fighting back against, 96

			gay marriage issue and, 18

			King and, 42

			religious faith and, 41

			segregation, 50–51, 52

			self-reliance, 30

			sensitivity, 15–16

			faux hypersensitivity, 17–20, 21–22, 25

			hypersensitivity, 13, 14–15, 23, 24

			September 11 attacks, 115

			Sessions, Jeff, xi

			sexism, 17, 57–58

			Simpson-Bowles commission, 121

			Singapore, 144

			single motherhood, 31

			slavery, xiv, 12–13, 33, 38, 188

			Snyder, Dan, 141

			socialism, 70

			caring for others and, 154

			social media, 87, 88, 90

			Sodom and Gomorrah, 194

			Solomon, King, 139–40

			see also Proverbs

			Southwestern High School, 35–36

			special interest groups, 63, 64

			sports stars, 184–86

			stimulus package, 142

			stock market crash of 1929, 44–45

			stores, bullying by, 90–91

			Summers, Lawrence, 12

			Supreme Court, 200

			survival of the fittest, 195–96, 199



			Tallmadge, Ben, 202

			taxes, xxi, 75, 80, 103–6, 120–21, 172

			in ancient Greece, 77

			corporate, 119–20

			for individuals and small businesses, 75, 120

			in modern Greece, 73

			Simpson-Bowles plan for, 121

			tithing and, xxi, 104, 120

			voting and, 104–5

			teachers, 187–88

			Tea Party, 68

			Ten Commandments, 192, 200

			terrorists, 150

			Thatcher, Margaret, 158

			tithing, xxi, 104, 120

			Title I schools, xix, 98–99

			Tocqueville, Alexis de, xvi, 40

			Tonight Show with Jay Leno, The, 6

			tort reform, 102–3, 146

			Toscanini, Arturo, 42

			trauma, emotional, 22–23

			Trial Lawyers Association, 64

			TSA (Transportation Security Administration), 119

			tyranny, 23, 39, 66, 126



			unemployment, 44, 121, 160

			unity, 6, 174–75

			bigotry and, 50

			political correctness and, 13, 17

			strength in, 69–71

			universities, liberal, 64, 89–90

			US News and World Report, 31

			utopian vision, 172–74



			veterans, 162, 207

			Vietnam War, 39

			vision, 169–80, 202–3

			action steps for, 180

			Constitution as, 170–72, 179

			constitutional convention and, 176

			deep division and, 174–75

			leadership and, 179, 180

			personal, 170, 180, 181–83

			and revering Constitution, 176–77

			utopian, 172–74

			and voting for those who uphold the Constitution, 177–79, 180

			for young people, 183–87, 190

			volunteer work, 162, 165

			voters, 135

			identification cards for, 4

			informed, 126, 127–28, 130, 131

			voting, 69, 87–88, 89

			for politicians who uphold the Constitution, 177–79, 180

			presidential election of 2012 and, 69, 130

			taxation and, 104–5



			Wall Street Journal, xxv

			war heroes, 189

			War of 1812, xxiii–xxiv

			Washington, Booker T., 30

			Washington, George, 55, 179, 201–2, 206–7, 211

			Watergate, 135

			Watters, Jesse, 6

			Watters’ World, 6

			Wayne State University, 158

			wealth development, 32–33

			weapons, 109–10, 175

			Weiner, Anthony, 186

			welfare, 101–2, 115, 158, 160

			rolling back, 161

			White House tours, 119

			Wilson Junior High School, 50

			wisdom, 138–51, 189

			action steps for, 151

			of Carson’s mother, 140–41, 142, 150

			education and, 141

			experts and, 141–42

			of God, 151

			health care and, 142–48

			humility and, 150–51

			knowledge and, 138–39, 141

			and learning from mistakes, 148–49, 151

			prioritizing and, 149–50, 151

			women’s suffrage movement, 33

			World Series, 70

			World War I, 45, 188

			World War II, 45, 58–59

			Japanese in, 38



			Yale University, 26–27, 159

			young people, role models for, 183–87, 190



			Zimmerman, George, 52





	 		Looking for more?



			Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a complete list of their books.



			Discover your next great read!





AMERICA

the BEAUTIFUL

Rediscovering What Made This Nation Great





BEN CARSON, M.D.

with CANDY CARSON





To those who have given

their time, resources, and even their lives

to create and preserve

“One nation under God, indivisible,

with liberty and justice for all.”

Also to the late Patricia Modell

and to Art Modell,

who represent true American patriotism.





CONTENTS


Cover

Title page

Prologue

1. AMERICA’S HISTORY OF REBELLING FOR CHANGE

2. WHO ARE “WE THE PEOPLE”?

3. ARE WE A JUDEO-CHRISTIAN NATION OR NOT?

4. A DIFFERENT SCHOOL OF THOUGHT

5. CAPITALISM: ITS PROS AND CONS

6. SOCIALISM: WHOSE POT OF SOUP IS IT?

7. WHAT IS A MORAL NATION?

8. LEARNING FROM OUR MISTAKES

9. AMERICA’S ROLE IN A WORLD AT WAR

10. IS HEALTH CARE A RIGHT?

11. A NATION DIVIDED

12. LIBERTY AND JUSTICE FOR ALL

13. WHAT’S GOOD ABOUT AMERICA?

14. WHAT DO WE BELIEVE AND IN WHOM DO WE TRUST?





Notes

Acknowledgments

About the Author

Also by Ben Carson, M.D.

Copyright

About the Publisher

Share Your Thoughts





PROLOGUE


THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is still the pinnacle nation in the world today. It is not, however, the first pinnacle nation to face a decline. Ancient Egypt, Greece, Rome, Great Britain, France, and Spain all enjoyed their time at the top of the world, so to speak — in many cases, for several hundred years. Then, as they began to decline, they all experienced some peculiar similarities: an inordinate emphasis on sports and entertainment, a fixation with lifestyles of the rich and famous, political corruption, and the loss of a moral compass.

One certainly sees this pattern being repeated in American society today, and if we continue to follow the course of other pinnacle nations prior to us in history, we will suffer the same fate. The question is, can we learn from the experiences of those nations that preceded us and take corrective action, or must we inexorably follow the same self-destructive course?

What was it about the United States of America — the child of every other nation — that was so different and so dramatically changed the world? For within only two hundred years of the founding of this nation, men were walking on the moon, creating artificial intelligence, and inventing weapons of mass destruction, among other things. In its relatively short history, America has transformed humankind’s existence on earth. Among the many factors involved in our success was the conscious creation of an atmosphere conducive to innovation and hard work. People cared about their neighbors, and when some became fabulously wealthy, they were willing to share their proceeds with those less fortunate. There was a sense of community, which meant that everyone was responsible for everyone else, including the indigent. But perhaps most importantly, there was a well-defined vision for the nation.

For the first time in the world, a nation was envisioned that was “of, by, and for the people.” This meant that there would be a great deal of individual, family, and community responsibility for everyone’s lives, as opposed to government responsibility. This also meant that there would be unprecedented freedom to lead one’s life without interference. A legitimate question for America to ask itself at this point in history is, do we still agree with the vision of the founding fathers? Or have we become much wiser than they were and therefore feel the need to adopt a different vision? Perhaps it is better to invest the government with great power and with the responsibility for taking care of all of us. We will consider both questions in this book.

If one goes back and looks at the belief system of many of our founding fathers, the faith they had in God, exemplified in both their words and deeds, is impressive. Some will argue that the United States has never been a moral nation because we engaged in slavery, and this certainly is an ugly chapter in our nation’s history, one that we will also examine as we seek to understand what it is that makes America beautiful.

Unfortunately, many today have come to equate morality with political correctness, but I believe that political correctness is a very dangerous force. Many people fled to this country from other countries where dictators and oppressive governments tried to tell people what they could think and what they could say. The ability to think and speak freely was one of the major tenets upon which this nation was established, and I suspect that the founding fathers would turn over in their graves if they could see how such tenets are being violated on a regular basis today by people adhering to political correctness. If people can’t freely speak their minds, conversations become muted and debate withers.

In this book, we will examine whether we can advance the great experiment that is the United States of America, perpetuating a free and prosperous nation that is “of, by, and for the people,” and whether we can learn from the mistakes of our past. If we can, rather than seeing the decline that has characterized all other pinnacle nations before us, I believe our best days will still lie ahead of us.





— CHAPTER 1 —





AMERICA’S HISTORY

OF REBELLING FOR

CHANGE


OF ALL THE NATIONS IN THE WORLD, of all the social experiments that have been tried down through the centuries, there is no country I’d rather be a citizen of and call home than America. Where else but in this land of opportunity are people given so much freedom to pursue their dreams, with the potential to bring out the best in everyone?

I have been fortunate enough to visit forty-nine of America’s fifty states, and I never cease to be amazed by the tremendous diversity one finds here — from big metropolitan cities to small countryside towns, from tropical islands to forested mountain ranges. Vast expanses of farmland produce more than enough food to feed our nation, and huge industrial areas produce airplanes, trains, cars, washing machines, and a host of other devices. The creative innovations of Silicon Valley and Seattle give us technological strength, and the great Northeastern corner of our country boasts some of the most prestigious educational institutions in the world. Add to that our ethnic and cultural diversity — one of our greatest strengths — and you begin to see how this nation’s diversity enabled it to rapidly become a world power.

Does America have its flaws? Absolutely. We’ve certainly made our share of mistakes over the centuries and then some. But in spite of our missteps, our nation’s history shows that out of our darkest periods, we have responded time and time again to work toward “liberty and justice for all.” One of America’s most respected legacies is indeed that of rebelling for change.

I grew up in inner-city Detroit and Boston at the tail end of one of those dark periods in America’s history. Slavery had long been abolished, but widespread racism remained. The civil rights movement was on the verge of completely transforming the social landscape, but such change often comes slowly. And today, decades later, I can still pinpoint the moment when I came of age regarding racism in America.

My brother and I were playing in Franklin Park in the Roxbury section of Boston when I wandered away alone under a bridge, where a group of older white boys approached me and began calling me names.

“Hey, boy, we don’t allow your kind over here,” one of them said. He looked at the others. “Let’s drown him in the lake.” I could tell they weren’t just taunting me, trying to scare me. They were serious, and I turned and ran from there faster than I had ever run before in my life. It was a shocking introduction for a little boy to the racism that ran through America at the time.

Growing up, we faced constant reminders of how we were less important than white people. Even some of those who claimed to be civil rights activists could be heard saying such things as, “He is so well educated and expresses himself so clearly that if you were talking to him on the telephone you would think he was white.”

By that time, economic hardship had forced us to move to Boston, and we were living with my mother’s older sister and brother-in-law in a typical tenement, where rats, roaches, gangs, and murders were all too common. One day my uncle William was giving me a haircut in the kitchen while we watched the news on television when I saw white police unleashing ferocious dogs on groups of young black people and mowing them down with powerful water hoses. Even little children were being brutalized.

Perhaps even worse than the overt racism that I witnessed on television was the systemic racism I witnessed in my own family. My aunt Jean and uncle William had two grown sons who frequently stayed with them in their dilapidated multifamily dwelling. My brother, Curtis, and I were very fond of our older cousins, who always made us laugh. But both of them were constantly in trouble with the police, which resulted in their brutal, racially motivated beatings or Uncle William having to bail them out of jail. Unfortunately, their close friends were drug dealers and gang members, many of whom were killed or died young. Ultimately both of my cousins were killed because of their association with the wrong people.

One could legitimately ask the question. Which is worse, overt racist behavior by the police, or a society that offered certain segments of its population little in the way of opportunities, increasing the likelihood of “criminal associations”? We didn’t realize these friends of our cousins were dangerous for us to be around. We only knew that they joked around with us, gave us attention, and even brought us candy from time to time.

It wasn’t just our inner-city neighborhood where racism flourished; I found it at school as well. During report-card-marking day in the eighth grade, for example, each student was supposed to take their report card from classroom to classroom and have their teacher place a grade in the designated spot. I was very excited because I had all As, and I had only one more class to go for a clean sweep. That class was band, which was going to be an easy A since I was an excellent clarinetist. That last A would make me a shoo-in for the highest academic achievement award in eighth grade that year. I was beaming as I gave Mr. Mann my report card, but my joy quickly turned to sorrow when I saw that he had given me a grade of C in order to ruin my report card and my chances of receiving the highest academic award. I knew that my winning the award would have been an eye-opening experience for many people at Wilson Junior High School, since I was the only black student in the class.

Much to Mr. Mann’s chagrin and to my delight, band was not considered an academic subject and did not count; therefore, I received the highest academic award after all. One of the other teachers was so upset about this that she literally chastised all the white students at the award ceremony in front of the entire school for allowing a black student to outperform them academically. The scene is depicted in the movie about my life, Gifted Hands, although in reality she ranted and raved a lot longer than the movie suggested. It was at least ten minutes, although it felt like longer.

In retrospect, I realize that all of these teachers and some of the students were simply products of their environment, but they triggered in me a strong desire to start my own personal civil rights movement to show everyone that I was just as good as they were by doing better than they did in school. As my academic awards and accomplishments continued to pile up, I had to combat feelings of superiority, which proved to be just as difficult as the task of fighting off an inferiority complex. Nevertheless, by the time I was in high school I had come to understand that people are people, and that their external appearance was not a good predictor of what kind of people they were.

In April of 1968, on the day after Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated, a major riot broke out at my high school in inner-city Detroit. Most of the black students were so outraged that they were trying to physically harm anyone who was white. Some very serious beatings took place, and I saw many of my white friends being harassed. The student population of the school was about 70 percent black, so the white students did not have much of a chance. At the time, I held a job as the biology laboratory assistant setting up experiments for the other students. The department even trusted me with a key to the science classrooms and the greenhouse. So during the riot, I used that key to open the greenhouse and hide several white students during the melee.

By that time in my life, I understood the extent of racism in America, but I also was beginning to have hope for the future. Having lived and studied among both black and white cultures, I knew that there are good white and black people and there are bad white and black people. It mattered not what color your skin was on the outside, but rather what the condition was of your heart and mind inside. And as I better understood human nature, I felt more emboldened to do things differently than everybody else and to chart my own course for a successful life.

I think that many of the people involved in the founding of our nation also felt they were victims of injustice, but they too had a profound understanding of human nature and set out to design a system different from previous governments that would level the playing field.

Today our nation faces a challenge of a different kind — one that nevertheless requires of us all a movement to stand up for our civil rights. One that asks us to educate ourselves as to the founders’ original vision for our nation and to take action to assure we protect and pursue that vision. While many nations lean on their past to give them a sense of accomplishment, the United States has a history of redefining itself and moving forward to ensure that there is indeed liberty and justice for all.





A NEW WORLD SPRINGS FORTH


The dangers that face our nation today are every bit as great as those we have faced in the past. The question is whether we have lost our capacity to endure hardship and sacrifice for future generations. We face a national budgetary crisis that threatens to rip our country apart and destroy our way of life, yet many concern themselves only with the governmental benefits they might lose. I write with the hope that we can reawaken the spirit of greatness that created the wealthiest, most compassionate, freest nation the world has ever seen. In this book we will embark upon a brief review of pertinent parts of our history that have everything to do with finding our way forward to a prosperous future.

Whether the first people to arrive on the North American continent were migratory tribes that traveled across a land bridge between what is currently Russia and Alaska, or whether they were ancient sailors who navigated the ocean — America has always had a rich and diverse ethnic background. Our nation began that way and we continue to expand that way. All kinds of people are responsible for our nation’s rapid development and great accomplishments, and by the same token, we share blame for many of the atrocities that have occurred on American soil.

The impetus for Europeans to quickly settle the Americas came from the discovery of vast mineral deposits and other natural resources that could create enormous wealth. It was Amerigo Vespucci, an acquaintance of Columbus, who is credited with America’s discovery in 1497, five years after Columbus landed in the Caribbean Islands while searching for a new route to the spice-rich Far East. Chinese Admiral Cheng Ho, who visited the Americas in 1421, could lay claim as well — and there is also evidence that Scandinavian explorer Leif Erikson reached the Americas hundreds of years before any of these other explorers. Regardless of who “discovered” America, Columbus’s expeditions certainly raised awareness back in the Old World as to the New World’s vast potential for increasing the wealth of those nations that were able to exploit it. And once this became known in the Old World countries, explorers began to arrive.

The Spaniards had significant colonies and exploited the mineral wealth here, and America could easily have been a Spanish-speaking nation, but an intense rivalry between Spain and England, particularly during the latter part of the sixteenth century, put America up for grabs. Spain’s domination of the oceans was challenged by England and the Dutch, who were building an extremely large merchant marine fleet in Europe. The final nail in the coffin of Spanish domination of the oceans took place in 1588, when the Spanish Armada was sunk in a battle with the English and, more importantly, by a ferocious storm, which decimated their mighty fleet. Because the English dominated the seas in the early 1600s, they decided it was their right to begin colonizing America, and the first of the permanent English colonies, Jamestown, was established in 1607.

I still remember the idyllic pictures of the Jamestown settlement in my school books as a child, but in reality the settlement was anything but ideal. Many of the settlers were English gentlemen who had no idea how to work in a wild environment. They quickly ran out of food while battling the Algonquin and enduring very harsh winter conditions. You don’t have to have much of an imagination to visualize how desperate those early settlers must have been. The vast majority of the early settlers succumbed to starvation and violence, and there are even credible reports of cannibalism. They suffered extreme hardship and personal sacrifice, all to create a more stable and prosperous future for subsequent generations.

The Europeans had also not anticipated the fierce resistance shown by the Native Americans, who had no intention of simply handing over their land. Although many movies portray the Europeans as vastly superior to the Native Americans in warfare, their most effective weapons were the diseases they brought, against which the Native Americans had no immunological resistance. These diseases wiped out whole villages and tribes through massive epidemics that were far more effective than any fighting force. While the Native Americans were being vanquished, the English, French, and Spaniards, among others, fought for the dominant position in the New World. The Jamestown colony would never have survived if it had not been for the friendship developed with the tribe of Powhatan, who taught them some basic fundamentals of farming and traded food for beads — a gracious, saving exception to the conflict and warfare that characterized our nation’s early history.

In time, the English Jamestown settlement grew and thrived, especially after the introduction of indentured servants and slaves in 1619 and the development of American tobacco, which quickly became all the rage in England and other parts of Europe. The rapid growth of the tobacco industry turned out to be a financial bonanza for the fledgling colony, enabling it to survive. There were early attempts at remote self-rule, the most permanent of which was the establishment of the House of Burgess, which consisted of a governor and “councilors,” appointed by the governor, and some representatives of estates.

Around the time of the establishment of the House of Burgess, a second permanent colony was being established by the pilgrims in Plymouth, Massachusetts, in the harbor of Cape Cod Bay. These religious separatists were interested in the New World primarily because they felt that their freedoms were compromised both in terms of religion and life in general. In an attempt at self-rule, they constructed an agreement of behavior known as the Mayflower Compact, the first formal constitution in North America. In this contract, they agreed to the fair and equal treatment of everyone for the good of the colony. Unfortunately, “everyone” did not include women, those who were not land owners, slaves and indentured servants, or the region’s natives. To their credit, they were attempting to build a type of society that was foreign to most of the world, since most colonies were governed according to the wishes of the ruler. These were immature baby steps toward a more noble goal, but at least they were steps in the right direction.

Over the next few decades, an explosion of colonization occurred, largely from people seeking religious freedom and/or financial opportunities. Many in Europe saw an opportunity to escape the oppressive and overbearing governmental systems under which they languished, and these people emigrated in droves, bringing with them a strong determination to make a better life for themselves and their offspring, unfettered by oppressive overseers disguised as government. The opportunities to enrich themselves through their own efforts brought out the best in many people, but it also brought out avarice, greed, and a host of unethical behaviors that invariably accompany freedom. Fortunately, those whose characters were constrained by religious principles far outnumbered those lacking moral rectitude. The British remained technically in charge of all these colonies, but due to the independent-minded nature of many of the colonists and the distance involved, British control was somewhat tenuous. The other great power of Europe, France, was also vying for control and power in the New World, but they were largely distracted by their ongoing wars with the Iroquois, and seemed to be much more interested in trading and exploration than they were in establishing permanent settlements.

Throughout the mid- and late seventeenth century, immigrants flooded in not only from England, but also from France, Germany, and other parts of Europe. Migrating into the area that was to become Pennsylvania, a large influx of Quakers provided a solid base for the abolitionist movement that was to come. By the end of the seventeenth century, the colonies had become more sophisticated and organized, establishing Virginia, Massachusetts, New York, Maryland, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Delaware, New Hampshire, North Carolina, South Carolina, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, with Georgia added in 1732. Thus the basis of the original thirteen colonies was in place.

During the rapid expansion of colonial life in America, England jealously guarded its sovereignty over America. The myth of royal supremacy engendered a royal entitlement belief known as “the divine right of kings” given by God to rule over the people. This right was ferociously guarded, and when it was challenged by British people like Colonel Algernon Sidney, public execution quickly followed. The English crown not only felt that it had a right to rule the colonies, but also to extract money from them. For several decades, England had been involved in ongoing warfare, mostly with France and Spain, which had drained the treasury; therefore, the king felt that the massive expenditures to protect the American colonies during the French and Indian War should be repaid in part by those who benefitted — namely, the colonists.

This ambitious taxation was a haunting echo of the life the colonists had experienced in the Old World and set out for the New World to escape. But it was also a harbinger of the times we find ourselves in today in America. In both instances, unrest began to stir in the people.





GROWING RESENTMENT OVER

OUT-OF-CONTROL TAXATION


The British Parliament had imposed many taxes on the colonists under the revenue acts, but still they were not satisfied with the amount of money being collected. So in 1765, the Stamp Act was passed, which imposed a levy on just about every type of legal document imaginable, including marriage licenses, college degrees — even such ordinary items as newspapers and playing cards. Needless to say, the colonists were not pleased about this, even though British citizens in England were already paying not only this tax, but many other exorbitant taxes. The Americans felt that once they acquiesced to more British taxation, there would never be an end to escalating tax rates, so they began to boycott British products. The colonists vigorously — and sometimes even brutally — encouraged their fellow Americans to use only products produced in the New World, and they began attacking British tax collectors, sometimes beating them, or even worse, tarring and feathering them. They also used these same intimidation tactics later on fellow Americans to assure compliance with boycotts of British goods. Finally, in 1766, the British Parliament repealed many of the taxes, including the Stamp Act. The colonists celebrated the repeal, even erecting a statue of King George in New York.

It wasn’t long, however, before the taxation monster raised its ugly head again, for in 1767, the Townshend Act was passed. This famously included taxes on tea, which the colonists had grown increasingly very fond of. Through trickery and parliamentary procedures, the Townshend Act allowed the British’s almost bankrupt East India Company to gain a virtual monopoly on tea sales, exacerbating tensions between the colonies and England. The colonists once again decided to boycott English imports, prompting an angry response from England, who sent four thousand British troops to quell the colonial protests. To sustain themselves in the New World, the British troops competed with the locals for jobs, which further inflamed tensions between the sides.

In December of 1773, some of the colonists were so outraged with the taxes on tea that they disguised themselves as Native Americans, boarded British ships in Boston Harbor, and destroyed the tea by tossing it all into the harbor. This, of course, was the famous Boston Tea Party. The British were so outraged that they closed Boston Harbor and instilled a harsher governing structure. More taxes and regulations followed, many of which were quite punitive and became known by the colonists as the “Intolerable Acts.” There were frequent clashes between the locals and the soldiers without bloodshed, but this changed on March 5, 1770, when a crowd surrounded a group of redcoats in an angry confrontation and the British soldiers fired shots into the crowd. Five of the locals were killed, the first of whom was Crispus Attucks, an African-American and the first American to die in the Revolutionary War.

The tensions between Great Britain and America continued to build and numerous skirmishes, some of which are well documented by historians, broke out. One of the most famous fights took place on June 17, 1775, at Breed’s Hill,1 where approximately 2,500 British troops attacked an American installation defended by only about 1,400 troops. It was an intense battle and the British lost approximately 40 percent of their troops, while the Americans lost less than a third of theirs. Even though the British eventually won that battle, it was a Pyrrhic victory, with the devastating psychological impact of their heavy casualties impacting the rest of the war.

The combination of heavy taxation, excessive regulations, and lack of representation in their governing structures irritated the colonists to the point that many of them began talking not only about ways to protest, but also about the desire to declare independence once and for all from the British Crown. With all of their backbreaking hard work, they felt it unfair to have such a significant portion of the fruits of their labors confiscated by a government that neither represented their interests nor respected their freedom. Nevertheless, many colonists (known as Tories or Loyalists) remained loyal to the British Crown and felt that the benefits of British citizenship — or at least of being a British colony — were too great to sacrifice for an uncertain future of independence.





WAKING UP TO SOME “COMMON SENSE”


In 1776, as Washington’s ragtag army kept British forces engaged, public sentiment was growing in favor of independence. All the colonists needed was a spokesman to galvanize public opinion toward resistance from Great Britain — and an unlikely figure emerged in the form of Thomas Paine. He had only been in the country for a little over a year, “arriving as a failure in almost everything he attempted in life. He wrecked his first marriage, and his second wife paid him to leave. He destroyed two businesses and flopped as a tax collector. But Paine had fire in his blood and defiance in his pen,”2 and America was and still is a country of fresh starts.

An editor of a Philadelphia magazine, Paine published a fifty-page political pamphlet, Common Sense, in January of 1776, which began with one of the most memorable lines in American history: “These are the times that try men’s souls.” The pamphlet resonated so well with the colonists’ feelings about independence that over 120,000 copies of the pamphlet were sold within the first three months, and half a million copies were sold in the first year. To put the impact of Paine’s pamphlet Common Sense into perspective, in the United States today you would have to sell about 65 to 70 million copies of a publication — or about one copy per four to five people — to equal the proportionate distribution.

Spurred on by the message of Common Sense, enthusiasm for independence grew dramatically, even among former Loyalists. Paine donated the profits from the sale of Common Sense to George Washington’s army, saying, “As my wish was to serve an oppressed people, and assist in a just and good cause, I conceived that the honor of it would be promoted by my declining to make even the usual profits of an author.”3 Thomas Jefferson even included a portion of Common Sense as the prelude to the Declaration of Independence, which was adopted by Congress in July of that year. The publication clearly resonated deeply with the American colonists’ desire for independence.

In fact, their longing for self-government and willingness to fight — even die — for freedom became so strong that the words of politician Patrick Henry became a rallying cry for the colonists when he said, “Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!” Finally, in 1776, each of the colonies (except Georgia) sent delegates to the First Continental Congress, where the process began for the drafting of the Declaration of Independence.





TEA PARTIES — THEN AND NOW


The rebellion of the Boston Tea Party has many similarities with the political movement today known as the Tea Party. For the sake of simplicity, let’s call the colonial protesters the old Tea Party movement and call the political movement established in 2009 the new Tea Party movement.

In the days of the old Tea Party, the British government and American Loyalists attempted to establish and maintain control of the colonies. When the Patriots first began to resist such efforts, those in power tended to deny that there was any real resistance from anyone except extremist, fringe individuals. Let’s call this the denial phase. But as the protests became more prolific, denial was no longer tenable, and the powers that be decided to ignore the movement. Their hope was that if they paid no attention to the protesters, it would be less likely that others would join them and the movement would simply fade away. Let’s call this the ignore phase. Unfortunately for those in control, ignoring the movement did nothing to lessen its intensity and, in fact, gave it time to grow even more powerful. The colonists ended up inflicting significant damage on those in power, forcing them to fight back, in many cases, with more force than necessary. Many of the regulations subsequently imposed were a part of this punitive resistance phase. The more the established powers resisted, however, the more determined the colonists were to overcome that resistance. Some of the British military leaders actually began to admire the tenacity and bravery of the colonial fighters.

After the Battle of Breed’s Hill, some of the enthusiasm of the British and American Loyalists began to wane, and doubts began to creep into their thinking about whether the growing war was really one worth fighting. The British had a long and successful history of colonizing many parts of the world, which had brought them great power and wealth, but America and the Americans were different than any of the other groups they had ruled. Perhaps, they considered, America should be exempt from the sovereign dictates of the throne. Maybe they were more like England than any of the other colonies in the world.

At some point in the struggle to regain power, it becomes easier for a ruler to exempt an unruly but powerful subject from punishment than to suffer defeat. During this exemption phase, it became increasingly easy for the Loyalists to desert the throne and align themselves with the Patriots, who were gaining power and the admiration of the populace. Many of those formerly in power — the American Loyalists, dedicated to the British crown, for example — began to believe and act on the very things they once railed against, conforming to the ideology and actions of their previous enemies. This we shall call the conforming phase. The final phase is the transformation phase, in which the ideology of the resistance movement becomes the mainstream philosophy governing a now changed society. And in the case of the American Revolution, the ideas of the old Tea Party — less central government, more local rule, and more personal responsibility — became the basis for a new society that rapidly rose to the pinnacle of the world.





THE NEW TEA PARTY: DIRECTING

AMERICA TODAY


The old Tea Party would probably have never been birthed if large segments of the colonial population had not felt oppressed and betrayed by the very government that was supposed to be taking care of their needs. If one were to make an acrostic of the first letters of each of these phases — denial, ignore, resistance, exempt, conforming, and transformation — one gets the word DIRECT, and that’s basically what happened: an enthusiastic group of fervent believers was able to direct a fledgling new nation away from corrupt, oppressive, nonrepresentative government to a fairer, limited, and representative government.

Now let’s look at the same DIRECT acrostic with respect to the new Tea Party. Late in 2008 and early in 2009, a number of things happened that caused great concern to a large number of Americans. Among these were the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, the bailout of several major financial agencies, and talk about dramatic reform of the nation’s health care system. Scattered small protests about these things were seen around the nation, but the entrenched powers of government and most of the media denied their significance.

Then on February 19, 2009, a business news editor on CNBC by the name of Rick Santelli in a national broadcast from the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange severely criticized government plans to refinance “underwater mortgages,” those mortgages whose values are less than the balance owed because of the collapse in housing prices. Many of the derivative traders on the floor in the background applauded, and the hosts of the show were bewildered.

The video of Santelli’s outburst went viral, with special emphasis on the part where he called for another tea party, during which traders would gather all of the derivatives for their mortgages and dump them in the Chicago River in protest of the massive corporate infusion at the expense of taxpayers. Shortly after that, many people on television began to refer to the various local protests as “tea parties.” The entrenched political establishment and most of the media ignored how fast these protests were growing, just as the British had regarded the colonial protests during the American Revolution. However, as the numbers and intensity of these protests began to multiply, the media began to make fun of the protesters in the hope that this would discourage others from joining in. The passage of the new health care legislation in December of 2009, contrary to what the majority of Americans wanted, was like pouring gasoline on a fire, and it dramatically increased the strength of the Tea Party movement. From the perspective of those in the new Tea Party, not only was the government spending money that it didn’t have at an alarming rate, but it had now enacted a gigantic federal program that was going to be very expensive and impose freedom-robbing regulations.

As the protests grew, however, they could no longer be ignored, and the resistance phase began to set in. The attacks from much of the media, from several members of Obama’s administration, and from the Democratic Party were relentless and mean-spirited. As with the colonial Tea Party, resistance only served to strengthen the movement, which was beginning to be joined by many notable political figures and other individuals. During the 2010 midterm primaries, Tea Party membership had grown to the point that it was able to significantly influence the outcome of the primaries. Since their values were more closely aligned with the values of the Republican Party than those of the Democratic Party, they concentrated on the Republican primaries, where they prevailed in several states, removing the entrenched traditional Republican candidate and replacing them with a Tea Party candidate.

It became increasingly clear that the Tea Party was not simply an arm of the Republican Party, but rather a significant force for real change. Its constituents recognized that both the Democrats and the Republicans were responsible for excessive spending, incessant pork barrel projects to benefit special constituent groups, and intrusion into the private lives of citizens. Tea Party members were especially outraged by the fact that the president and Democratic congressional leaders did not seem particularly interested in the feelings of the people, as manifested by their cramming of the health-care bill down the throats of the American people. As with the colonial Tea Party, denial, ignoring, and resistance had all failed to stem the tide; therefore, it was time for them to exempt themselves from the struggle to quash the rebellion.

Commentators stopped deriding the Tea Party and began recognizing it as a legitimate political force. They began to think that maybe it was different from some of the other fringe movements that had popped up over the course of the preceding decades. Officials of the Obama administration stopped calling them “tea baggers” and began treating them with respect. As this book is being written, the conforming phase is beginning, and I wouldn’t be surprised to see the transformation phase arise before or soon after the 2012 presidential election.





OUR NATION IS IN HOT WATER


For several decades now, America has basically had a two-party system: Democrats and Republicans. Each of these parties has been engaged in the gradual but consistent growth of the central government and its claim on power. Ever-expanding programs offering benefits to the masses are difficult to resist, and with the proliferation of the news media it also became possible for elected officials to gain great notoriety and power. This power became addicting to many elected officials who, instead of going to Washington, DC, for a brief time to represent their constituency, wanted to hold their positions for extended periods of time — even for life. This growing power and the progressive intrusion of government into the lives of the people was so insidious that it went largely undetected. This process is much like the frog that willingly sits in the saucepan as the temperature is gradually increased until the water is boiling, killing the frog. The frog would have immediately jumped out of the saucepan, however, if the water was already boiling from the beginning.

In early 2009, many throughout America voiced their discontent as they began to worry about the excessive government spending for such programs as TARP (Troubled Assets Relief Program) and the proposed bailout for many Wall Street entities and large companies such as General Motors. The country was already in significant debt, with no clear indication of how that money was going to be repaid. It is easy to see how our growing debt, excessive spending, and elected leaders ignoring the will of the people closely resembles the set of circumstances that precipitated the American Revolution.





WILL WE ONCE AGAIN REBEL

FOR POSITIVE CHANGE?


America got off to an auspicious start centuries ago because its citizens were unwilling to be herded like sheep by an elite group of “leaders.” They were driven instead by a desire to take ownership of their own fate and establish a nation created by them and for them. Their self-determination and celebration of freedom to control their own lives helped birth our great nation.

Today, however, a fundamental shift has occurred in the role of our nation’s government and the role of its people, and so throughout this book, we will determine whether those seeds of independence still remain viable or whether they have been supplanted by passivity and acceptance of the status quo. For freedom is an elusive bird, constantly on the move, progressively distancing itself from complacency. Do we value our freedom enough to pursue it, or have we lost our way without realizing it? Do we benefit from the principles that established this nation without understanding them?

What will we as America’s citizens write in this next chapter of our history? Will we settle for being herded by our leaders’ understanding of what is best for us? Or will “we the people” once again rally together, educating ourselves as to the best possible solutions for a way forward, communicating to our leaders our collective desires, and demonstrating that we truly are a nation that rebels for positive change?





— CHAPTER 2 —





WHO ARE

“WE THE PEOPLE”?


GROWING UP, MY BROTHER, Curtis, and I frequently disagreed about who was responsible for the chaos in the cramped bedroom we shared. We often left our clothes strewn about and our beds unmade, and the boundary dividing our room into his half and mine shifted depending on how much of our stuff was lying around and which one of us was having friends over.

Father was no longer at home to provide any leadership. He had left the family when Mother found out he had been living as a bigamist across town. Mother wasn’t home much, either — but for very different reasons. She was almost always out working, trying to provide for us as best she could. Consequently, we almost never had anyone around the house to referee our disputes or hound us to do our chores.

How was Mother able to establish effective rules in such a chaotic situation? Although we got into a fair amount of trouble at home, there never were any serious incidents because we had guidelines that governed our behavior in the absence of an authority figure. Mother was smart enough to realize that if she simply imposed rules on us, we were unlikely to follow them; therefore, she involved us in the rule making. We all had a say in who would do the dishes, who would sweep the floors, who would warm the food, who would take out the garbage, and so on. We also agreed upon the punishment for not carrying out one’s duties and the rewards for doing a stellar job. This system of governance was well defined and well accepted, so there was almost no trouble. I am frequently asked why Curtis and I obeyed our mother when sometimes we didn’t see her for an entire week. The answer is quite simple — they were not just her rules, they were also our rules, for ownership of an idea makes cooperation with its tenets much more likely.

So Curtis and I had to come to solutions ourselves regarding our room, and that is exactly what we did. In order to make things work, we simply each accepted responsibility for the entire room for a week at a time. The room was cleaner than ever because it was always clear where responsibility lay.

We were part of the family, and Mother treated us that way. She didn’t coddle us or tell us what to do every step of the way, as if we were incapable of making decisions on our own. She wanted us to contribute to the success of our family as a prelude to becoming successful in the world.





OWNERSHIP OF AN IDEA LEADS TO

GREATER COOPERATION


Throughout history, we humans have attempted to create rules that would lead to peace and prosperity, as well as fairness among the nations. Unfortunately, those goals have rarely been achieved, despite numerous and varied attempts throughout time and around the world. If we have learned over the centuries and have become so smart, why is it so difficult for us to make progress in these areas? If ownership of an idea makes cooperation with its tenets much more likely, why can’t the same principles work for a larger society?

The fact of the matter is, there are many examples in early American history where self-governance did work — and extremely well at that. Many of the Quaker societies and the Amish and Mennonite communities functioned efficiently, peacefully, and fairly. Perhaps the past tense is not the best one to use, since many of the Amish and Mennonite communities are still thriving today. We see many patients from these communities at Johns Hopkins Hospital, and we are always thrilled to admit them because they are very friendly and extremely cooperative. They pay their bills and you never have to worry about them trying to sue you. If everyone were that way, medicine would be a much more pleasant profession and costs would be considerably lower. There are no homeless people in these communities and extremely little crime. Among them, there is a strong sense of caring for one’s neighbor, yet hard work on the individual level is still rewarded. Many people in these communities own businesses and have accumulated substantial wealth, which is beneficial to everyone else in the community since many jobs are created as businesses expand in a free environment.

Many nations, such as ancient Israel and the medieval English, made admirable attempts at establishing fair and peaceful societies. Their principal idea was to allow the people to govern themselves as much as possible. Ancient Israeli government, for example, was set up as a commonwealth of freemen. “Proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof,” reads Leviticus 25:10, in celebration of the Year of Jubilee. Their basic belief was that all men should be free, and the founding fathers of our nation echoed that belief by having this same verse inscribed on the Liberty Bell. The people of ancient Israel were organized into small groups of families, and each of those families had a voice and vote in that group through a representative. Representatives of those groups reported to a higher-level group, and this continued until you reached the topmost governing level. Strong, local government to solve problems on the level at which they occurred kept the number of cases that rose to the highest level to a manageable number. (“The hard causes they brought unto Moses,” reads Exodus 18:26, “but every small matter they judged themselves.”) They focused on reparation to the victim rather than punishment or fines levied on the perpetrator, and common consent of the people was necessary for new laws and elections (or rejections) of leaders.1 The accused were presumed innocent until evidence revealed beyond a shadow of a doubt their guilt. In rare, borderline cases, the decision was made in favor of the accused with the mind-set that if he had actually committed the crime, that punishment could be left to God in the afterlife.



In Anglo-Saxon Common Law, as in the Israeli setup, the people were a commonwealth of freemen. Every adult had a voice and vote, and the groups of families were organized in units of ten, each with an elected leader. Like the Israelis, those leaders had representatives from their groups that met on a higher level, and attempts were always made to solve problems on the level where the problem originated. It was systems such as these that inspired our nation’s founding fathers to promote not only cooperation, but widespread participation.2





DEMOCRACY WAS NEVER INTENDED

AS A SPECTATOR SPORT


The founding fathers of America were extremely well-educated men and great students of history, “the well fed, well bred, well read, and well wed,” as historian James McGregor Burns described them.3 They represented a nouveau aristocracy, not by birth as in the mother countries, but through development of their minds and talents.

These men certainly feared having a government that was too big and too powerful, as they had experienced across the ocean, so when trying to assemble an appropriate governing structure for this country, these dedicated Americans deliberated for over four weeks trying to decide what kind of government we would have. This included heated philosophical and political discussions over the tenets of Aristotle’s six forms of political constitution, ranging from tyranny and monarchy to democracy and polity.4 The situation was too critical for them to leave the organization of the new government to just anyone, and so they ultimately incorporated many of the best ideas from other cultures along with a heavy dose of faith in God and a lot of hard work.

Could a government’s power truly rest in the hands of the people? Could such an experiment really work? By definition, in legislative- and decision-making processes, a democracy requires full participation of all the people. But most people are so involved and preoccupied with daily duties and routines, they have neither the time nor energy to participate in hearings and study the issues sufficiently enough to prepare for a vote. Several times the ancient Greeks attempted to utilize democratic mass participation in governing their city-states, but each time it resulted in tyranny. As the population expands, a democracy becomes increasingly inefficient and rowdy.

Although the noble goal of democracy had been tried by other societies, power usually eventually shifted to some central authority and the dream of autonomy died. Even with the well-established system of democracy created by the ancient Israelis, the people became dissatisfied and demanded a king. Without question, when one has a central authority figure the squabbling and arguments quickly die out and it is easier to get things done. The founding fathers understood this tendency and endeavored to create a system that would resist the urge to become a monarchy. Yes, there had been benevolent kings and queens, but they had experienced firsthand a monarch who cared not for the populace at large.

This process of developing a government that could utilize the power bestowed on it by the people to govern effectively but efficiently was tricky business. These men had witnessed the tyranny of monarchs and the ineffectiveness and inequality of large governments, and they recognized that a democracy would quickly stagnate if everybody had to weigh in on every decision. Therefore, they decided that a republic-type government would be much more efficient, in which elected representatives of the people would make decisions. Also, with a republic there is no limitation on expansion.

“A republic, by which I mean a government in which the scheme of representation takes place,” stated James Madison in The Federalist Papers, “opens a different prospect and promises the cure for which we are seeking.”5 A republic, he further defined, is “a government which derives all its powers directly or indirectly from the great body of the people, and is administered by persons holding their offices during pleasure for a limited period, or during good behavior. It is essential to such a government that it be derived from the great body of the society, not from an inconsiderable proportion or a favored class of it; otherwise a handful of tyrannical nobles, exercising their oppressions by a delegation of their powers, might aspire to the rank of republicans and claim for their government the honorable title of republic.”6

In other words, if this new government was to survive and flourish down through the centuries, it would need a way to prevent the abuse of power.





THE CHECKS AND BALANCES, PLEASE


At the Constitutional Convention, where the US Constitution was drafted, the founders decided to divide power within the federal government to ensure that it would not be controlled by just one man or one group. Three divisions or branches were the result: the executive branch, the legislative branch, and the judicial branch, each of which has duties concerning the law.

The job of the legislative branch, which consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate, is to create laws when necessary — and there was never any intention that they would just sit around arbitrarily creating laws, particularly laws that benefitted special interest groups. The executive branch, which includes the president, the vice president, the office of the attorney general, and the departments governed by each of the cabinet secretaries, all execute the laws provided by the legislative branch. All cabinet-level appointments were to be confirmed by the Senate, and there was no provision for the appointment of czars — as we have today to oversee the implementation of policies ranging from the recovery of the US auto industry to the doling out of economic stimulus — without official oversight. Finally, the judicial branch interprets the laws. In recent decades, however, we have seen more activism by the judicial branch, which is why there is so much bickering surrounding each nomination to the Supreme Court. Each and every political persuasion wants someone appointed who is philosophically aligned with them, with the hope that the judge’s activism will work in their favor. Again this was not the original intention of the founding fathers, and it is a good reason why we need to consider term limits for Supreme Court Justices.

Each of the three branches has the ability to impact the activities of the other two, creating a system of checks and balances. This was an ingenious system created by our founders to help avoid the kinds of tyrannical governmental systems from which they had fled. As long as we maintain a degree of balance in the three branches of our government, we are unlikely to tilt too far in one direction or the other, thereby destroying our democracy. “In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men,” James Madison pointed out, “the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place, oblige it to control itself.”7





BASIC POWERS AND CHECKS


EXECUTIVE POWERS (PRESIDENT)


Approves or vetoes federal bills.

Carries out federal laws.

Appoints judges and other high officials.

Makes foreign treaties.

Can grant pardons and reprieves to federal offenders.

Acts as commander-in-chief of armed forces.





CHECKS ON EXECUTIVE POWERS


Congress can override vetoes by 2/3 vote.

Senate can refuse to confirm appointments or ratify treaties.

Congress can impeach and remove the president.

Congress can declare war.

Supreme Court can declare executive acts unconstitutional.





LEGISLATIVE POWERS (CONGRESS)


Passes federal laws.

Establishes lower federal courts and the number of federal judges.

Can override the president’s veto with 2/3 vote.





CHECKS ON LEGISLATIVE POWERS


Presidential veto of federal bills.

Supreme Court can rule laws unconstitutional.

Both houses of Congress must vote to pass laws, checking power within the legislature.





JUDICIAL POWERS (SUPREME COURT)


Interprets and applies the law by trying federal cases.

Can declare laws passed by Congress and executive actions unconstitutional.





CHECKS ON JUDICIAL POWERS


Congress can propose constitutional amendments to overturn judicial decisions. (These require 2/3 majority in both houses, and ratification by 3/4 of the states.)

Congress can impeach and remove federal judges.

The president appoints judges (who must be confirmed by the Senate).8





Why three branches? The idea of having three branches of government was birthed by the writings of Baron Charles Montesquieu, an authoritative French professor, author, and legal philosopher — who was the most often quoted source among the colonists next to the Bible.9 His book The Spirit of Laws “greatly impacted the formation of the American government, as it was read and studied intently in America.”10 In it, Montesquieu acknowledges the deceit and wickedness of the human heart, as shown in Jeremiah 17:9, and advocates for a system that tries to check and moderate mankind’s worse excesses by dividing power into three parts, inspired by Isaiah 33:22, which states, “For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is our king.”

The real genius in the system of checks and balances established by the founders is that the executive branch — the branch most likely to become too powerful and “king-like” — is checked by the other two branches of government that did not want to be minimized. And in order for the system to be truly representative of the people, the representatives were intended to be integral members of their communities. The constituents of the House of Representatives and Senate were to be farmers, teachers, nurses, doctors, lawyers, businessmen, pharmacists, and — well, you get the picture. They were to represent every segment of society so that everyone’s interests would be represented fairly. As long as you have broad representation from many parts of society, representative government works extremely well. And it works even better when the representatives serve for only a short period of time and return to their communities, leaving a spot for someone else from the community to become the next representative.





CHECKS OUT OF BALANCE


A couple of things can severely interfere with the efficacy of this system of checks and balances, however. One is when an elected representative becomes entrenched and wants to keep returning to the House of Representatives, becoming progressively less connected with the community that he or she represents. Although the founding fathers thought of many things, they failed to realize that the facet of human nature that makes people strive for power and influence might result in it becoming very difficult for them to give up their seat in the House of Representatives once they had it. The other detrimental thing is having one profession or group of individuals being overly represented. If there were too many doctors serving in and/or represented in government, there would probably be an overabundance of health-related legislation; likewise, if there were too many farmers, there would likely be an abundance of agricultural legislation.

Perhaps as you’ve been reading you’ve wondered why a neurosurgeon is sharing his ideas about government when the training, education, and focus of a neurosurgeon’s life is decidedly scientific and concerns biomedical dilemmas and solutions. You might be surprised to know that five physicians signed the Declaration of Independence, and many of them were involved with the creation of the United States Constitution. I believe it is a very good idea for physicians, scientists, engineers, and others trained to make decisions based on facts and empirical data to get involved in the political arena and help guide our country. Physicians were once much more involved in their communities and with governance in general. But in recent years we have tended to spend all of our time in our operating rooms, clinics, laboratories, and professional societies, leaving the governance to others. This is a mistake, because we should be concerned not only about the health of individual patients, but also about the health of our entire society. Since those in the health-care professions are among the most highly trained people in our society (a typical physician spends an average of over five years in postgraduate training), we should be willing to share the benefits of our education and critical thinking with the society that made it possible.

As it stands today we have too many lawyers in government — many of whom are very smart and decent people — but they are not immune from acting like lawyers. Consequently, we have far too much regulatory legislation. Also, what do many lawyers learn in law school? They learn to win by hook or by crook; it doesn’t matter how you fight as long as you win. Imagine a roomful of Democratic and Republican lawyers, each with one overriding goal to win, and this certainly helps one understand the distasteful partisan politics that characterizes Congress today.





THAT UNINTENDED FOURTH BRANCH

OF GOVERNMENT


Having three, well-balanced branches of government was an inspired and creative idea, but I do not believe that the founding fathers intended for a fourth branch of government to emerge — that of special interest groups. These groups would not have the great power they do today in the scenario originally envisioned by the founding fathers, in which dedicated citizens served in Congress for a few years and then returned to their original walks of life. But because many in Congress want to keep returning term after term, they need to constantly campaign and seek funding, much of which is obtained from special interest groups. Needless to say, money from these groups is not given without strings being attached. These tangled relationships have reached the point now where powerful corporate groups, unions, and other groups with large amounts of money to spend can exert great influence on the legislative process, which essentially pitches logical solutions to problems out the proverbial window, and favors solutions that benefit the special interest groups. This is an extremely serious problem, which threatens the very integrity of our system of government. I suspect that if the founding fathers were suddenly resurrected and saw the current situation, they would mandate a constitutional convention to find a solution to this problem posthaste!

One solution to the problem of special interest groups might be to lengthen the term one serves as a representative from two years to six, eight, or even ten years — with no possibility of reelection. You could couple that term length with a right of recall by the populace every other year if the representative were doing an exceptionally bad job. Congressmen could then govern based on the wishes of their constituents and pay little or no attention to special interest groups. Can you even imagine how much more efficiently and logically our government would work under such a circumstance?

A few years ago, my friend Dr. Henry Brem, who is the chairman of the neurosurgery department at Johns Hopkins, and I wrote an op-ed piece for the Washington Post focusing on tort reform. In that piece, we called for the media to focus attention on the United States senators who had been co-opted by the Trial Lawyers Association to the point that they would always filibuster any tort reform bill that came before the Senate. This is certainly an example of how the media could be very helpful by exposing not only the special interest groups and what they are doing, but also the leaders who are being influenced by them. Revealing this practice could discourage such close relationships between our elected officials and special interest groups.

The founding fathers certainly feared government becoming too big and too powerful. Observing this imbalance overseas, Thomas Jefferson wrote in a letter, “Experience declares that man is the only animal which devours his own kind; for I can apply no milder term to the governments of Europe, and to the general prey of the rich on the poor.”11

When the American experiment appeared to be preparing to return to big government rule, ex-President George Washington wrote to Justice John Jay, astounded that the ideals that had been agonized over, rehashed, and reworked had fallen into a whirlpool of indifference:

What astonishing changes a few years are capable of producing! I am told that even respectable characters speak of a monarchical form of government without horror. From thinking proceeds speaking, thence to acting is often but a single step. But how irrevocable and tremendous! What a triumph for the advocates of despotism to find that we are incapable of governing ourselves, and that systems founded on the basis of equal liberty are merely ideal and fallacious! Would to God that wise measures may be taken in time to avert the consequences we have but too much reason to apprehend.12



The founders realized that a gigantic government would require increasingly large amounts of resources from the people in the form of taxes, and that the people would consequently expect more from such a government since they were giving it so much of their money. Eventually government could become so big that its ravenous appetite for tax money coupled with a populace that expects so much from it creates a bloated, unsustainable system, no longer able to provide for itself. Many of the countries from which the founding fathers fled could be characterized in just this way, which is why they were so rightly concerned the United States would fall prey to the same problems.

Certainly the plight of such countries as Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain have received a lot of attention recently13 due to significant public outcries, demonstrations, and even riots because their governments have not been able to fulfill their promised social obligations to the people due to lack of funds, despite high tax rates. We could not ask for more timely examples of what happens when we abandon our founding principles of limited government and protecting individual rights.





OUR FREEDOMS: A SYSTEM BUILT TO

CHANGE WITH THE TIMES


The founding fathers also knew they needed to design a system that would give the people flexibility to alter the government if it became too bloated. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press, as well as the right to peacefully assemble, were among the key provisions included to preserve our freedom. In many societies around the world, criticism of the government can result in imprisonment or death; in America, however, criticism occurs on a daily basis. In fact, our free press is one of the real virtues of American society. One of the greatest journalists of all time was Walter Cronkite, whose integrity was never questioned. Although his political leanings were decidedly left-wing, you would have had great difficulty detecting it because of his balanced treatment of the news.

I do not want to be overly critical of the news media today because I realize what a difficult task they have reporting news around the clock. When one has all day to talk about the news — and one has to talk about the news all day — it is hard not to offer personal commentary and, at times, embellish. Nevertheless, we the people should expect integrity from the news media and unbiased reporting of newsworthy events. When a news reporter or commentator can tell a flat-out lie and not be terminated or even required by the network to offer a public apology, we have a problem. I am still a big fan of our news media, however, and I certainly hope they can take corrective action on their own to preserve a noble profession.

The freedoms built into our Constitution actually give us power to dramatically change things about our society with which we disagree. For instance, in the 1950s and 1960s, segregation and racial discrimination were rampant in America. The populace became increasingly discontent with the glaring injustices they witnessed nightly on television. Many nonviolent protests were carried out, and the media did a magnificent job of highlighting the shortcomings of both federal and local governments in resolving the situation. As a result of these social movements and the courage of many individuals, a whole way of life that was a scourge upon our nation was changed. Protests and the media were also instrumental in ending the Vietnam War. As long as we have a courageous populace, and a courageous and unbiased media, we are likely to be able to correct significant societal problems as they arise, which is a part of the greatness of America. Unfortunately, political correctness threatens the integrity of the media, and we must all be vigilant in our attempt to continue the great experiment that is America.





IS THIS A GOVERNMENT BY THE PEOPLE,

FOR THE PEOPLE?


The kind of government proposed by the framers of our Constitution was intended to serve the people. This meant providing protection, adequate infrastructure, the right to make a living, and the right to pursue happiness. The kind of government that the framers did not want was one that tried to control the lives of its constituents. They realized that the latter type of government would transform “we the people” from a “can do” society to a “what can you do for me” society.

It is really quite phenomenal how quickly America went from a lowly colony to the very pinnacle nation of the world. It happened because so many people were willing to work hard, not so much for themselves as for their children and their grandchildren. Many of them had emigrated from countries where hard work did not pay off, and they were excited to be in a place where they could actually realize the fruits of their own labor in a tangible way, improving the possibilities for their offspring.

Those who propelled our nation to the pinnacle status in a very short period of time also knew the importance of sacrifice. Now it sometimes seems our government leaders do not understand the concept of sacrifice. They have no problem with the populace sacrificing, but our federal government does not seem to know how to tighten its own belt, preferring to simply raise taxes to cover its own excesses. This would not be the case if our representatives in Congress were more in tune with their constituency. The current government is akin to a person who checks into a hotel and discovers that all of his bills are being taken care of by someone else, and so he feels free to live it up.

As long ago as 1791, Thomas Paine noted a similar situation in the governments of Europe. In his book The Rights of Man he observed the following:

If from the more wretched parts of the old world, we look at those which are in an advanced stage of improvement, we still find the greedy hand of government thrusting itself into every corner and crevice of industry, and grasping the spoil of the multitude. Invention is continually exercised, to furnish new pretenses for revenues and taxation. It watches prosperity as its prey and permits none to escape without tribute.



Several of our founders had very strong opinions on this type of taxation. “To take from one,” Thomas Jefferson wrote in a letter, “because it is thought his own industry and that of his fathers has acquired too much, in order to spare to others, who, or whose fathers, have not exercised equal industry and skill, is to violate arbitrarily the first principle of association, the guarantee to everyone the free exercise of his industry and the fruits acquired by it.”14

Taxation is not the only way in which the government is out of step with the lives and wishes of the people. The overwhelming majority of Americans want the southern borders of our country secured and our immigration laws enforced, but several administrations recently have been unwilling to get tough on this issue because they do not want to alienate a large voting block of Latinos. This is yet another area where our government’s leadership and the wishes of many of the people diverge and the people are being ignored.

When a government turns from following the will of its people to willing its people to follow — acting according to its own prerogatives — it ceases to be a representative government and instead has transformed into something else. One need only look back to one of our most foundational governing documents, the Declaration of Independence, to hear the founders’ original intent for our nation: “Governments are instituted among men,” wrote Thomas Jefferson, “deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.” Our unique governing process was laid out clearly and concisely in our Constitution, and for centuries it has successfully withstood the test of time. Because of its clear instructions for the transfer of power, administrations from our different parties have always transitioned smoothly, unlike most other countries.

But political and economic stability over a long period of time can breed complacency among its people, and Jefferson cautioned us that a government should be by the people. “Every government degenerates,” he wrote in his book Notes on the State of Virginia, “when trusted to the rulers of the people alone. The people themselves, therefore, are its only safe depositories.”15 And in order to serve as those “safe depositories,” we the people must keep ourselves informed and abreast of the actions of our governing leaders, speak out, and vote accordingly — lest our government lead us somewhere we have no desire to go.





— CHAPTER 3 —





ARE WE A

JUDEO-CHRISTIAN

NATION OR NOT?


IN APRIL OF 1999, the world was shocked by the horrific murders at Columbine High School in Colorado. Some very close friends of ours were so deeply moved by the tragedy that they dedicated much of their lives and their substantial financial resources to making sure that good came out of the situation. This extraordinary couple gained the trust of the families who lost children in the shooting, as well as school officials and legal representatives, and they established a charity to promote character building in schools as a deterrent to the type of behavior that Columbine High had suffered.

The program plan was for students to select thirteen of the most desirable, positive character traits (in honor of the thirteen victims and in keeping with the thirteen colonies of the American Revolution), each of which was associated with an historical figure, such as “Honesty and Abe Lincoln.” Students exemplifying these character traits would be rewarded each year. Due to my close relationship with these friends, and because I do a lot of public speaking for schools and educational organizations, I was asked to be the keynote speaker at Columbine for the rollout of the new program. I have spoken to all types of groups throughout this nation and many other parts of the world, but there was something particularly special about speaking at the site of such an infamous, evil event. Before actually going to the school, I met some who had survived the shooting as well as family members of victims. It seemed as if I knew them already since there had been so much publicity surrounding each victim. The brother of one of the young ladies who was killed — and who had narrowly escaped with his own life — was particularly articulate and a fabulous spokesperson for the group. He was a devout person of faith and a tremendous encouragement to me.

When I first stepped on campus I noticed that the school’s hallways were incredibly sterile; there were no stickers, graffiti, or any other signs of the myriad ways that high school students usually decorate their environment. It had indeed been a war zone. I was told by some of the officials that all graffiti had been removed to ensure that no one was frightened or influenced to join a group that was not completely wholesome.

One of the officials indicated to me that they knew I was a man of faith, but that it would not be appropriate for me to talk about God or Jesus Christ. Although I did not show it outwardly, I was stunned, because I thought Columbine High School would be the last place on earth where I would hear such an admonition. Those officials were not bad people; quite the contrary. But they were extremely afraid of creating controversy or being blamed for what had occurred. I could tell that some of the administrators did not agree with this policy, but they wanted to maintain the harmony. I don’t usually get nervous before a speech, but in this particular case I had received so many warnings about what not to say due to the sensitivity of the audience, that I was off my game.

The program was beautifully organized by our friends, the school officials, and students, and I was already quite inspired by the time I took the podium in the gymnasium before the entire school body, parents, officials, and the media. I spoke a bit about hardship and how it can be an advantage if one does not become a victim. I also commented about resilience and how success is frequently preceded by failure, but at the conclusion I had to talk about God and the very godly principles that resulted in the establishment of our great nation. At the end, I received a standing ovation from an incredibly enthusiastic crowd, and I knew that I had done the right thing by not hiding my faith or denying the principles that have led to well-functioning harmonious communities throughout our nation. Was I aware that I was violating the established protocols for the program? Of course I was. But I also knew that the whole purpose of the program was to promote character, and if I denied my faith I would be manifesting a total lack of character — for the sake of pleasing a few, I would have disappointed many.

One of the reasons public institutions would rather exclude God is to avoid offending others and creating controversy. They do not want Jews to be offended by the mention of the name Jesus Christ, nor do they want Muslims to be offended by the Torah, nor Christians to be offended by treks to Mecca.

The story of Abraham is well known to Jews, Christians, and Muslims; he is referred to as “the father” in all three religions. Yet even though there is a common ancestor, human nature and the desire for superiority has turned these differences into cause for war and mayhem. Historically, millions of people have been killed in the name of religion. The brutality associated with the Crusades, the Muslim conquests, the French Wars of Religion, the Reconquista, and, more recently, the Jihad illustrate how strongly people can feel about their religion. But can all this religious fervor be channeled in a positive rather than negative way?

As a Christian, I am not the least bit offended by the beliefs of Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormons, and so forth. In fact, I am delighted to know that they believe in something that is more likely to make them into a reasonable human being, as long as they don’t allow the religion to be distorted by those seeking power and wealth.

Those in positions of leadership in our society must familiarize themselves with the religions of all their citizens, and they must begin to emphasize the commonalities that unite us as people of faith. Common objectives placed on the forefront of public policies will help people work together and bond us together as a nation in spite of our religious differences.

Another example that caused me to contemplate the question, are we a Judeo-Christian nation or not? was when I was asked to deliver the keynote address at the 1997 Presidential Prayer Breakfast in Washington, DC. This is of course a great honor, for the audience consists not only of the president, vice president, and their families, but Supreme Court justices, United States senators and congressmen, as well as ambassadors and dignitaries from every walk of life from all over the world. I became familiar with the Secret Service through many calls and emails, and everything had to be scripted down to the second. They had a hard time believing I was a spontaneous speaker and did not use notes. I was pretty excited about the speech until someone said to me that I should not mention the name of Jesus Christ. That seemed like a very strange request for a prayer breakfast.

In the receiving line in the pre-breakfast reception — the first time that I met President Clinton and his wife as well as the Gore family — my entire family had the opportunity to shake hands with the president and vice president, as well as meet many people you usually see only on the national evening news.

When it was my turn to speak, I briefly recounted my rise from inner-city poverty to the esteemed halls of Johns Hopkins. I talked about how education cultivates human potential and I spoke about integrity, particularly in public office. Coincidentally, I delivered this speech just before the Monica Lewinsky situation became public. The president must have been wondering, does he know what’s going on? Obviously I did not know, but even if I had, I would have still made the same remarks. President Clinton, like all of us, had some weaknesses which got him into trouble. He is not the first public figure to have such troubles and certainly will not be the last. I suspect he would have been better served if he had simply confessed his wrongdoing and asked for forgiveness, but that of course is much easier said than done. Students of American history may recall that Alexander Hamilton had an affair while in public office, but when he quickly confessed publicly and was forgiven, the issue was pushed aside, much to the consternation of the mistress and her husband who were planning to blackmail Mr. Hamilton.

I finished the speech with my philosophy for success in life, which includes strong faith in God and my Savior Jesus Christ. The response was overwhelming, and the standing ovation lasted for several minutes, throwing the program off its strict time schedule. The president, in typical Clintonesque style, took the microphone and asked, “Who is responsible for putting this guy on the program before me?” To which the crowd responded with raucous laughter. I subsequently got tons of mail complimenting me on what many felt was the best presidential prayer breakfast address they had ever heard. Out of the thousands of people at the breakfast, and millions of people who heard the address, I received only one negative response for using the name of Jesus. This tells me that the level of tolerance for religious differences is much greater than the politically correct crowd would have us believe.





FOUNDING FATHER, FULL OF FAITH


But what did the founders of our nation believe? Were they Christian believers in God or were they deists? A deist believes in God as a First Cause, a clockmaker who set up the universe to operate on its own. Deists do not believe in a God who intervenes in this world. By that standard, George Washington was by no means a Deist.

In George Washington’s Sacred Fire, the former president is quoted in a letter written in May of 1789 to the General Assembly of Presbyterian Churches in the United States:

While I reiterate the professions of my dependence upon Heaven as the source of all public and private blessings; I will observe that the general prevalence of piety, philanthropy, honesty, industry, and economy seems, in the ordinary course of human affairs, particularly necessary for advancing and conforming the happiness of our country.

While all men within our territories are protected in worshipping the Deity according to the dictates of their consciences; it is rationally to be expected from them in return, that they will be emulous of evincing [striving to prove] the sanctity of their professions by the innocence of their lives and the beneficence of their actions; for no man who is profligate in his morals, or a bad member of the civil community can possibly be a true Christian, or a credit to his own religious society.1



The founding father of our country was definitely a believer in the God of the Bible, a man not only of tremendous intellect, but of conscience, caring, dedication, and faith. And his faith was founded on experience. One particularly interesting account occurred on July 9, 1755, during the French and Indian War. George Washington was with the British troops under General Edward Braddock on their way to Fort Duquesne when they were ambushed by the French. The Brits were being slaughtered since they were only accustomed to fighting in open fields. To deliver orders from General Braddock to the troops, Washington rode horseback back and forth across the battle. Every other officer on horseback, except Washington, was shot down. Even General Braddock was killed, at which point the troops fled in confusion. After the battle, on July 18, 1755, Washington wrote to his brother, John A. Washington: “But by the all-powerful dispensations of Providence, I have been protected beyond all human probability or expectation; for I had four bullets through my coat, and two horses shot under me, yet escaped unhurt, although death was leveling my companions on every side of me!”

Fifteen years later, Washington and Dr. Craik, a close friend of his from his youth, were traveling through those same woods near the Ohio River and Great Kanawha River. There they were met by an old Indian chief, who addressed Washington through an interpreter:

I am a chief and ruler over my tribes. My influence extends to the waters of the great lakes and to the far blue mountains. I have traveled a long and weary path that I might see the young warrior of the great battle. It was on the day when the white man’s blood mixed with the streams of our forests that I first beheld this chief [Washington]. I called to my young men and said, mark yon tall and daring warrior? He is not of the red-coat tribe — he hath an Indian’s wisdom and his warriors fight as we do — himself alone exposed. Quick, let your aim be certain, and he dies. Our rifles were leveled, rifles which, but for you, knew not how to miss — ‘twas all in vain, a power mightier far than we, shielded you. Seeing you were under the special guardianship of the Great Spirit, we immediately ceased to fire at you. I am old and soon shall be gathered to the great council fire of my fathers in the land of shades, but ere I go, there is something bids me speak in the voice of prophecy: Listen! The Great Spirit protects that man [pointing at Washington], and guides his destinies — he will become the chief of nations, and a people yet unborn will hail him as the founder of a mighty empire. I am come to pay homage to the man who is the particular favorite of Heaven, and who can never die in battle.



A famous Indian warrior who was in that battle said, “Washington was never born to be killed by a bullet! I had seventeen fair fires at him with my rifle, and after all could not bring him to the ground!”2

Why was this history removed from school textbooks, which had included it up until 1934? As incredible a story as it may seem, it demonstrates the effect of having faith in God — for a person or even for a country. As George Washington himself said, “It is the duty of all Nations to acknowledge the providence of Almighty God, to obey his will, to be grateful for his benefits, and humbly to implore his protection and favors.”3





ESCAPING PREJUDICES, PURSUING LIBERTIES


Many of the colonists had fled Europe to escape prejudices and to enjoy the liberty of worshiping according to their beliefs. But this was not necessarily the case for others, and George Washington was more open-minded than most in embracing those who had come to the New World for other reasons. One of his good friends, Haym Salomon, had immigrated from Poland in 1772 after having traveled throughout Europe. In a time when Jews were thought of as shylocks and money grubbers, George Washington recognized the solid character of Haym.

At that time, Congress had no powers of direct taxation and was struggling to raise money to support the war. Congress requested money from the states, but these requests were mostly refused. So perilous was the status of the army that they often lived day-to-day. The only choice left to our government was to borrow funds.

Haym Salomon, who became a very successful currency broker, used his financial savvy to finance the Revolution. Salomon volunteered his own fortune of 600,000 pounds sterling to begin the American Revolution — which today would be several million dollars, an immense fortune.4

When the British Parliament authorized covert financial tricks to undermine the colonists, such as counterfeiting colonial paper money and discrediting American envoys in Holland and France, they were hoping to cause Washington’s army to mutiny from lack of pay and necessities. But Salomon came through again with personal loans and brokered finance deals both in the New World and elsewhere around the world.

Salomon also proved his worth as a spy for George Washington as well as a finance man when he was captured by the British. When he noticed the British soldiers didn’t speak German, and the German mercenaries who had been hired by the Brits didn’t speak English, he informed the Brits of his knowledge of languages, without actually offering to translate. (He did not want to be seen as a Loyalist.) While interpreting, he then persuaded over five hundred Hessian soldiers from Germany to desert the British cause for the American side! Salomon also solicited every able-bodied Jewish man to fight in Washington’s army. After the war, he organized the first American veterans’ organization, “The Jewish War Veterans,” which is still active today.

Michael Feldberg writes, “Within five years of his arrival in Philadelphia, Salomon advanced from penniless fugitive to respected businessman, philanthropist, and defender of his people. He risked his fortune, pledged his good name and credit on behalf of the Revolution, and stood up for religious liberty. Despite financial setbacks at the end of his life, Salomon’s name is forever linked to the idealism and success of the American Revolution, and to the contributions Jews have made to the cause of American freedom.”5

It is clear that significant Judeo-Christian influences were involved in the founding of our nation, although being a nation of all peoples, coming from different backgrounds and cultures, Christian, Jewish, and others, did not hinder us. Although it is difficult to verify, many believe that a star of David on the back of the one dollar bill is a tribute to Haym Salomon and the many Jewish Americans who fought for our initial freedom.





FAITH OF OUR FOUNDING FATHERS


Freedom of religion is one of the basic tenets of the founding of our nation, and while we are primarily a Judeo-Christian nation, we are a nation of faith that encompasses many religions and beliefs. We as a nation welcome all nonviolent people of every faith, and there was never any intention by our founders of excluding religion from our public or private lives. They did not want us to embrace a theocracy, but neither did they want us to eschew religious principles.

Our National Day of Prayer, for example, is a significant part of our heritage. In 1775, during a meeting of the Continental Congress, all of the colonies were asked to pray for wisdom as the policies to govern the nation were being formed. During the Civil War, President Lincoln proclaimed a day of “humiliation, fasting and prayer,” and in 1952, President Truman signed a joint resolution from the Congress officially creating a National Day of Prayer.

Undoubtedly, there are some in our country who are very uncomfortable with the highest levels of our government recognizing and encouraging prayer, but as Mrs. Shirley Dobson, who was chairman of the National Day of Prayer, put it, “We have lost many of our freedoms in America because we have been asleep. I feel if we do not become involved and support the annual National Day of Prayer, we could end up forfeiting this freedom too.”6 However, in April 2010, US district judge Barbara Crabb in Wisconsin ruled that the government-sanctioned National Day of Prayer, established by Congress and supported with a proclamation from the president, is unconstitutional.

I believe the problem arises from misinterpretation of what our founders intended with respect to government and religion. Having lived in Europe’s Old World they were very familiar with the deleterious effects of state-sponsored religion. They never wanted to see the government endorse a specific religion, but neither did they want to see faith and religion suppressed. There is nothing at all in our founding documents forbidding or denigrating religious expression in public life. The judge in this case was responding to a lawsuit filed by a group of atheists and agnostics called the Freedom from Religion Foundation. They complained that the government did not have the right to tell them to pray, but perhaps they didn’t notice that prayer was not a requirement, but rather a suggestion. A government requirement would be something like paying your income taxes. If you owe taxes and refuse to pay them, you will quickly learn the difference between a suggestion and a requirement.

Speaking on the separation of church and state, Joel Oster, senior counsel for the Alliance Defense Fund, added, “The National Day of Prayer provides an opportunity for all Americans to pray voluntarily according to their own faith — it does not violate the establishment clause of the First Amendment.”7 Not only have polls shown that most Americans feel positive about a national day of prayer, but interestingly a Rasmussen report from February 2010 showed that 65 percent of Americans prefer having prayer in schools! Unfortunately, the very vocal minority trying to suppress religious expression in America has been successful in getting this issue to the top of the political correctness list. Even though most Americans believe in God and many have a strong personal faith, political correctness decries public declarations of that faith. Yet even both houses of Congress begin each session with public prayer. Because I do a lot of public speaking, people regularly thank me for being bold about my belief in God. If most people believe in God and yet we are afraid to speak of that belief in public, what does that say about the freedoms that our ancestors fought and died for?

At the Constitutional Convention of 1787, Benjamin Franklin, who was eighty-one years old, gave the following address on June 28 when hostilities and bitterness threatened to totally disrupt the convention:

Mr. President: the small progress we have made after four or five weeks close attendance and continual reasoning with each other — our different sentiments on almost every question, several of the last producing as many noes as ayes, is methinks a melancholy proof of the imperfection of the human understanding.

We indeed seem to feel our own want of political wisdom, since we have been running about in search of it. We have gone back to ancient history for models of government, and examined the different forms of those republics which, having been formed with the seeds of their own dissolution, no longer exist. And we have viewed modern states all round Europe, but find none of their constitutions suitable to our circumstances.

In this situation of our assembly, groping as it were in the dark to find political truth, and scarce able to distinguish it when presented to us, how has it happened, sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly applying to the Father of lights to illuminate our understanding? In the beginning of the contest with Great Britain, when we were sensible of danger, we had daily prayer in this room for divine protection. Our prayers, sir, were heard, and they were graciously answered. All of us who were engaged in the struggle must have observed frequent instances of a superintending Providence in our favor.

To that kind Providence we owe this happy opportunity of consulting in peace on the means of establishing our future national felicity. And have we now forgotten that powerful Friend? Or do we imagine we no longer need His assistance? I have lived, sir, a long time, and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth — that God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without His notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without His aid?

We had been assured, sir, in the sacred writings, that “except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it.” I firmly believe this; and I also believe that without His concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the builders of Babel: we shall be divided by our partial local interests, our projects will be confounded, and we ourselves have become a reproach and byword down to future ages. And what is worse, mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance, despair of establishing governments by human wisdom and leave it to chance, war, and conquest.

I therefore beg leave to move — that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessing on our deliberations, be held in this assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the clergy of this city be requested to officiate in that service.8



The speech apparently had such a profound effect on all present that the assembly voted to begin every session with prayer, a tradition that has continued until this day. I love to drag this passage out when so-called intellectuals claim that Benjamin Franklin was an atheist. Many people like to rewrite history or delete portions to bolster their arguments before gullible audiences. But I am so grateful for people such as former congressional candidate William Federer, who has done extraordinary research to uncover documents revealing the true sentiments and beliefs of our founders. Only through the careful study of historical documents can we prevent the distortion of where we came from and who we are as a nation.

Freedom to worship or not worship as one pleases would not be an issue were it not for the extreme intolerance of antireligion groups. In many cases, these are the very same people who brand anyone who disagrees with their agenda as bigoted and intolerant. Their extreme hypocrisy is almost comical, were it not so sad.

I have also frequently heard people question the faith of Thomas Jefferson. However, in his 1781 notes on the state of Virginia, he wrote, “God who gave us life gave us liberty. And can the liberties of a nation be thought secure when we have removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the people that these liberties are of the gift of God? That they are not to be violated but with His wrath? Indeed, I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just; that His justice cannot sleep forever.”

This passage and many others like it leave no doubt about Jefferson’s beliefs. There are many more convincing statements by other founding leaders such as George Washington, John Adams, Alexander Hamilton, Daniel Webster, Thomas Paine, John Locke, James Madison, and others that make it clear there was never any intention of removing God from the public sphere of our nation.9

Remember all the controversy in 2003 surrounding the order given by a United States district judge to remove the Ten Commandments monument from the rotunda of the Alabama State judicial building? A similar thing then happened in the courthouse in Jackson County, Kentucky, where the Ten Commandments had to be removed in response to a lawsuit. Statues, nativity scenes, and other religious objects have also been removed by zealous opponents of anything that has to do with God. Somehow the people initiating these lawsuits believe that making these objects visible to the public violates the establishment clause of the First Amendment to the Constitution, which says the legislature should make no law respecting an establishment of religion. They conveniently forget about that part of the amendment that follows saying that the government should not prohibit the free exercise of religion. The infamous lawsuit instigated by Michael Newdow in Sacramento sought to remove the phrase “under God” from the Pledge of Allegiance, but if these kinds of activities don’t constitute the prohibition of free exercise of religion, then what does? Until the antireligion zealots learn the meaning of the word tolerance, we will continue to experience unnecessary strife.

What message are we sending the next generation when a student is not allowed to express himself freely? In the Morgan v. Plano Independent School District case, also known as the “candy cane” case, several students were denied their free speech rights and discriminated against because their speech was religious in nature. A young boy was singled out and banned from handing out candy cane pens with a religious message at his class “winter” party. This case also includes a little girl who was threatened for handing out tickets after school to a religious play, and an entire class of kids was forbidden from writing “Merry Christmas” on holiday cards to American troops serving overseas. The government officials who appealed the ruling are now arguing that elementary students are too young to have First Amendment rights.10

If anyone is still skeptical about our roots as a nation of faith, consider the fourth stanza of our national anthem:

Oh! Thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand

Between their loved homes and the war’s desolation,

Blest with vict’ry and peace, may the heav’n-rescued land

praise the pow’r that hath made and preserved us a nation.

Then conquer we must, for our cause is just,

And this be our motto — “In God is our trust.”

And the star-spangled banner in triumph doth wave

O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.



Is it any wonder that God has blessed America to such a great extent? We acknowledge him in our founding document, the Declaration of Independence, in our Pledge of Allegiance, in our courtrooms, in our national anthem, and on our money, to name a few things. In return, he has blessed us above all nations just as he said he would. Before we throw away those blessings, remember what George Washington said: “The man must be bad indeed who can look upon the events of the American Revolution without feeling the warmest gratitude toward the great Author of the Universe whose divine interposition was so frequently manifested in our behalf. And it is my earnest prayer that we may so conduct ourselves as to merit a continuance of those blessings with which we have hitherto been favored.”11

Could it be that the father of our nation was not only talking to the people who were his contemporaries, but was also providing a word of encouragement and warning for future generations?





— CHAPTER 4 —





A DIFFERENT SCHOOL

OF THOUGHT


ON MY FIRST DAY in Mrs. McQueen’s bright, cheery kindergarten class at Detroit’s Fisher Elementary School, all students were required to bring a rug on which to sit while we happily learned new songs, games, and facts all day long. Since my mother was (and still is) so thrifty, she was able to supply one for me in spite of the fact that we didn’t have much money. At the time, I didn’t think about the fact that it probably came from either Goodwill or the Salvation Army; I was simply excited about the new experience and the opportunity to play with so many other children.

Kindergarten, first, second, and the first half of third grade were not particularly rigorous. School was mostly fun and games, I was an average student, and life was peaceful. After my parents got divorced and we were forced to move to Boston, we lived in a tenement not far from Franklin Park and the Zoo. My brother, Curtis, and I walked through the park every morning on our way to a parochial school, which had only two classrooms. There were four grades in each classroom, and all eight grades were taught by only two teachers. Consequently, the vast majority of our time was spent singing songs and playing games.

By the time my mother, Curtis, and I moved back to Detroit, I had essentially lost a year of school while in Boston, my academic performance lagging far behind that of my new classmates. To make matters worse, I was the only black kid in the class. In those days in Detroit, academic expectations for a black boy were not very high, particularly in a predominantly white school. After every quiz, each student had to report his or her score out loud for the teacher to record, and classmates always snickered after I announced my abysmally low scores. Although they teased me a great deal about this, none of them ever had to worry about getting the lowest score on a test as long as I was in the classroom. You might say I served as the class safety net.

Needless to say, my self-esteem began to follow my academic expectations of myself in a downward spiral. I would even laugh along with others at some of the jokes about me. To cope with the ridicule, I smiled a lot and tried to adopt a nonchalant attitude about being the class dummy. I secretly admired those who always knew the answers and were the last ones out in the spelling bees. I never imagined that I could be smart, let alone win a spelling bee. The low expectations everyone had for me — including my own expectations of myself — would certainly have predicted a dismal future for me.

Fortunately my mother, with her third-grade education, was terrified that because of our poor academic performance both my brother and I would end up with low-paying menial jobs as she had. She didn’t know what to do to help change our path, so she asked God to give her wisdom on how to inspire her sons to work hard and make something of themselves. That’s when she came up with the idea of turning off the television and making us read two books apiece from the Detroit public libraries each week. She also made us submit to her written book reports, which of course she could not read, but we didn’t know that. Her friends told her that her sons would grow up to hate her, but that did not matter to her, as long as we were successful.

I didn’t hate Mother, but in the beginning I sure hated reading those books. After a while, however, I actually began to look forward to them, because they afforded me a fantastic escape from our everyday poverty and sense of hopelessness. There in the city, books about nature captivated me. First I read Chip, The Dam Builder, then other animal stories over the years up to Jack London’s Call of the Wild as my reading ability increased. I began to imagine myself as a great explorer or scientist or doctor. I learned things no one else around me knew. Every single day my knowledge of our world expanded, which excited me to no end. And since I was constantly reading, I became a much better speller and started becoming competitive in the spelling bees.

Once I started believing I was smart, I really didn’t care that much about what anybody else thought about me, and I became consumed with a desire to increase my learning far beyond that of my classmates. The more I read biographies about those who had made significant accomplishments in life, the more I wanted to emulate them. By the time I reached the seventh grade, I reveled in the fact that the same classmates who used to taunt me were now coming to me, asking how to solve problems or spell words. Once the joy of learning filled my heart, there was no stopping me.

Many of the teachers at Southwestern High School in Detroit were excellent, but they rarely had the opportunity to demonstrate how good they were because so much of classroom time was wasted handling disciplinary problems. I remember seeing teachers in tears because of the treatment they received from students trying to show off for others. Things almost turned violent when a substitute was once unfortunate enough to be cast into the “den of lions.” The young teacher assigned to one of my history classes had the glasses, tweed jacket, brown shoes, and short pants to suggest that he was a nerd, and the students could not wait to begin tormenting him with odd noises, paper wads, and wisecracks. He became so frustrated that he left the room, and the assistant principal had to come restore order. The same scenario was repeated over and over again in my biology class with Mr. McCotter, a very nice man with a big heart, who wanted nothing more than to impart a solid education to the students who mercilessly tormented him. In spite of the resistance he faced, he never left the class and continued trying to teach against the odds. Given the challenges facing teachers such as these, it isn’t hard to understand why Detroit has such low high school graduation rates.1

In spite of her exhaustion from working to make ends meet, Mother was dedicated to making sure Curtis and I would buck the trend, and if we were still up when she arrived home from work, she never neglected to ask what we had learned in school that day. Because of all the reading she had encouraged me to do, I was very motivated to learn and took it upon myself to achieve a first-class education in a second-class environment. I would go back after school to talk to any teacher whose lesson had been derailed by interruptions and ask, “What were you planning to teach today?” They would of course be delighted to share with me what they had prepared, and very much appreciated someone benefiting from their hard work.

Dedicated to placing myself in positions in which my education would flourish, I subsequently became the biology laboratory assistant and was responsible for setting up the laboratory experiments. This meant that, regardless of what lessons did or did not take place in class on any given day, I learned them nevertheless. Not long after that, I began helping set up some of the chemistry and physics laboratories as well.

My own initiative to learn was also encouraged by many of my teachers, who had a profound effect on my education. Mrs. Miller, one of my English teachers, took a strong interest in my academic performance and had tremendous influence in my life, frequently acting as a barrier between me and my recurrent desire to be part of the crowd. And many of my other teachers encouraged me to take part in the regional forensics contests, citywide competitions in which students from various schools had an opportunity to recite poetry or dramatic prose before an audience who rated them in terms of style and effectiveness. There I acquired a great deal of confidence in my ability to speak in public.

I also received help and guidance to participate in many of the citywide and statewide science fairs. These competitions exposed me to students from more affluent areas who were considerably more advanced than I was, inspiring me to work even harder.

One need look no further for public servants than the many public school teachers around our country. The vast majority of them not only pour themselves tirelessly into their work for the sake of their students, they also forgo all kinds of recognition and financial compensation to do so. When I won a scholarship to Interlochen, one of the most prestigious music camps in the country, instead of being elated that Southwestern High School had finally produced this level of musical talent, my band teacher, Mr. Doakes (who went on to become Dr. Doakes), advised me not to accept the scholarship “because it would interfere with my preparation to become a great doctor one day.” He was willing to forgo a huge feather in his own cap for the sake of my career. Teachers like him were not uncommon as I was growing up, and it is one of the reasons why I have so much respect and admiration for teachers today.

Intending to become a citizen of the world, I extended my own education far beyond the school’s curriculum. I began frequenting art museums, historical societies, and many of the collections and galleries found on campuses of local colleges and universities. I became quite an expert in identifying classical music, and both art and music remain an important part of my life today.

Through education, I was completely changed to become a productive citizen of the world. And what is true in the life of one is true in the life of whole communities and entire nations: education has the power to transform. I firmly believe that the solid public education system established in the American colonies centuries ago was largely responsible for our nation’s rapid rise on the world stage in the areas of economics, innovation, and industry. And what was possible then is still possible today.





VALUING EDUCATION, THEN AND NOW


Whenever an election is at hand, there is a lot of talk about the importance of education — but with a national high school dropout rate of 30 percent, we do not seem to be making much progress. A lot of talk may be just what it is. Our society is quite willing to spend hundreds of millions of dollars on a new stadium for the city’s football or baseball team, while leaving many of the same city’s public schools in a dilapidated condition with tattered books — and in some cases no books at all. Our young people see through this hypocrisy and tend to emulate what they see more than what they are told.

It was not always like this, however. Our nation’s founders placed so much emphasis on education that towns in Massachusetts could actually be fined for not providing adequate public education. As early as 1642, a law was passed by the Massachusetts Bay Colony making education a requirement for children.2 Compulsory education was much slower to reach the southern states,3 and education of slaves was forbidden.4 The very fact that powerful men in the South went to great lengths to prevent slaves from gaining an education makes it clear that they fully understood how empowering education can be. This fact alone should encourage anyone who is poor, weak, and/or powerless to direct all their energy toward obtaining an education.

The fact of the matter is, our founding fathers were highly educated individuals, many of whom had extensive personal libraries — and most of them had a vast knowledge of world history. They were not people of average intelligence. And as they were crafting the policies of our new nation, they designed a system that would work well only with an educated populace. This is why they emphasized the importance of a solid education.

In fact, when Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville arrived in America in 1831 to decipher the secrets of our enormous economic success, he was so taken with our school system that he wrote extensively about what he saw as a unique and powerful tool to fuel a productive new nation. Unlike schools in Europe, American schools taught the children values, he noticed, and there was extensive use of the holy Bible in public schools. He wrote in Democracy in America:

Upon my arrival in the United States the religious aspect of the country was the first thing that struck my attention; and the longer I stayed there, the more I perceived the great political consequences resulting from this new state of things. In France I had almost always seen the spirit of religion and the spirit of freedom marching in opposite directions. But in America I found they were intimately united and that they reigned in common over the same country.5



He was particularly impressed by the fact that anyone finishing the second grade could read and write quite well. Even when he explored the frontiers, he was astonished to find common men engaging in intelligent conversation, reading the newspaper, and understanding the various branches of government. He also reflected:

I sought for the key to the greatness and genius of America in her harbors … in her fertile fields and boundless forests, in her rich mines and vast world commerce; in her public school system and institutions of learning. I sought for it in her democratic Congress and in her matchless Constitution. Not until I went into the churches of America and heard her pulpits flame with righteousness did I understand the secret of her genius and power. America is great because America is good, and if America ever ceases to be good, America will cease to be great.6



To gain a real appreciation of what children were expected to know in early America, one has only to look up an exit exam from middle school grades during the nineteenth century. I suspect that many, if not most, college graduates today would fail that test. Some sample questions:

Describe three of the most prominent battles of the Rebellion.

Name events connected with the following dates: 1607, 1620, 1800, 1849, and 1865.

Show the territorial growth of the US.

Name and locate the principal trade centers of the US.

Name all the republics of Europe and give the capital of each.

Describe why the Atlantic Coast is colder than the Pacific at the same latitude.



Over the ensuing decades, the American system of public education was admired throughout the world because of the quality of its products — its very citizens, well educated and ready to engage with the growth of their new nation.





THE DECLINE OF US EDUCATION


In the mid — twentieth century, however, a series of things began to happen that negatively impacted the quality of public education in the US. Public prayer was banned in school, and the educational agenda began to expand significantly beyond basic reading, writing, and arithmetic. By the early 1990s, a multinational study to determine the ability of eighth-grade equivalents in twenty-two different countries to solve complex math and science problems found that students in the United States ranked number twenty-one out of twenty-two. That the pinnacle nation in the world would have such a poor academic showing is not only embarrassing but extremely frightening.

When we instill morals and values into the educational process for young people, however, we help them realize they have an obligation to become well educated and informed citizens, and to contribute to the system as opposed to draining it of its resources. Public prayer and discussion of common principles that strengthen society’s moral fabric are essential to establishing an atmosphere of courtesy and decency. The renowned Noah Webster said, “Society requires that the education of youth should be watched with the most scrupulous attention. Education, in a great measure, forms the moral characters of men, and morals are the basis of government.”7

Today in the age of information and technology, “knowledge is power” more than ever before in the history of the world. Certainly during the Agricultural Age, the United States was able to produce so much corn, wheat, and barley that we became known as the breadbasket of the world. But we are no longer in the Agricultural Age. The Industrial Age followed, during which the United States blossomed into a giant that could produce more cars, airplanes, washing machines, and weapons than anyone thought possible — changing the course of the world for the better. But we are no longer in the Industrial Age. We now find ourselves in the Information Age, where academic accomplishment is more important than ever.

Today we produce only 60,000 to 70,000 engineers per year, 40 percent of whom are foreigners, while China produces over 400,000 engineers per year. With this kind of technological discrepancy, we will be left far behind in the not too distant future unless we begin to address our educational shortcomings with more than political rhetoric. China is not a democracy, and its emergence as a rising superpower will radically change the geopolitical landscape of the world.

Even if young people are not concerned about their role in world affairs, they should clearly be concerned about their own future economic well-being. Everyone should realize that today the average person lives to be about eighty years of age, the first twenty to twenty-five of which are used to either prepare oneself educationally — or not. For those who prepare well, about sixty years shall follow to reap the benefits; but for those who fail to prepare, there are sixty years to suffer the consequences. When you look at it that way, sacrificing a bit of fun and idleness early on can pay big dividends in the long run. Furthermore, as of 1999, a US Census Bureau report entitled “The Big Payoff: Educational Attainment and Synthetic Estimates of Work-Life Earnings” revealed that over an adult’s working life (ages twenty-five through sixty-four), a high school graduate can expect to earn an average of $1.2 million. A college graduate will earn $2.1 million, while someone with a master’s degree will earn $2.5 million. A person with a doctoral degree will earn $3.4 million, and those with professional degrees — such as medical, dental, or veterinary degrees — will earn $4.4 million on average. Obviously there has been some relative advance on those numbers since 1999, further underscoring the point.





EVERY OUNCE OF AMERICA’S TALENT MATTERS


Some readers may be thinking, I have worked hard and achieved a lot in my personal life, so why should I worry myself about the well-being of people who are too lazy to take advantage of opportunities to succeed? However, for every one of those young people we can keep from choosing a self-destructive path, that’s one less person we have to be afraid of or protect our families from, one less person we will have to pay for in the penal system or the welfare system, and one more productive, taxpaying member of society who may discover a new energy source or the cure for cancer. Every person is endowed with God-given abilities, and we must cultivate every ounce of talent we have in order to maintain our pinnacle position in the world.

Our nation’s founding fathers certainly believed in the task of educating the populace as foundational to a nation’s health. In a letter to George Chapman on December 15, 1784, George Washington wrote, “The best means of forming a manly, virtuous, and happy people will be found in the right education of youth. Without this foundation, every other means, in my opinion, must fail.” James Madison added, “A popular government, without popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy; or, perhaps both. Knowledge will forever govern ignorance: and a people who mean to be their own governors, must arm themselves with the power which knowledge gives.”8

These statements by some of our founding fathers emphasize how essential a solid general education is to all the constituents of American society. By remaining ignorant, we shirk our democratic duty and open ourselves to slick politicians who would usurp our rights. Some of the segments of our society who are most easily led astray are those with the poorest general education, which makes one wonder if those seeking political advantage are happy to maintain the status quo in order that the uneducated might be more easily manipulated.

The founders also believed that education is crucial to offering checks and balances to governing leaders’ power. Otherwise, the insidious loss of freedom, quite relevant to us today, will follow. For “enlightened statesmen will not always be at the helm,”9 James Madison noted in The Federalist Papers. He also pointed out in a speech to the Virginia ratifying convention on June 16, 1788, that “there are more instances of the abridgment of the freedom of the people by gradual and silent encroachments of those in power than by violent and sudden usurpations.”

We can certainly see a gradual erosion of hard-won rights everywhere around us today. For instance, a recent regulation imposed by the Department of Veterans Affairs banned the words God and Jesus during funeral services at the Houston National Cemetery. This obvious violation of the Constitution is being challenged legally by the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion, and the National Memorial Ladies, who fortunately are educated enough to know their rights and are brave enough to fight for them.

I’m sure our nation’s founders hoped and prayed that we would not stray from the freedom they fought and died to provide. Reading about their vision for a unique nation inhabited by people with unprecedented freedom is truly inspiring, and we must be careful not to allow those who like to rewrite history to silence the voices of those God-fearing visionaries who founded America. We have a very rich history of placing tremendous value on education, and there is no reason that we cannot once again become the world’s most educated nation.

We have a tremendous amount of technology available to us that can help us quickly close the achievement gap that exists between our children and those in many other advanced nations. One such technology currently being developed is a computer program that analyzes the way a student solves math problems to figure out where there are gaps in that student’s knowledge. The computer then tutors the student in his or her area of deficiency until the student is able to solve problems correctly. This is, of course, the same thing that a good teacher can do, but computers provide the ability to tutor a whole classroom simultaneously as opposed to one student at a time, allowing the teacher freedom to focus energy on students needing personal attention. We also should put a great deal of emphasis on the concept of virtual classrooms. Although the technology is only in its infancy, it will provide the ability to put the very best teachers in the world in front of millions of our children on the same day. It will allow children to virtually explore the pyramids of Egypt, or the Amazon Basin, or even the surface of the moon. This kind of education should also be available to parents and other adults who want to know what their children are learning and desire to increase their own value, because knowledge is power. Not only can we do this, but we must do this in order to remain a potent worldwide leader in this age of information.





— CHAPTER 5 —





CAPITALISM:

ITS PROS AND CONS


EVERYONE HATES SOMETHING. Some hate spiders; others hate lizards or snakes, but I hated poverty. Growing up near the Delray and River Rouge neighborhoods of inner-city Detroit, and the Roxbury section of Boston gave me an up-close and personal view of poverty. I hated being poor, and I was eager to find a way out.

Living in run-down housing joined at common walls meant we could hear our neighbors on both sides of us, so sleep came only when voices settled down, if they did at all. On some nights, especially weekends, parties extended far into the morning hours. Break-ins and burglaries were common in the neighborhood, so we fortified our home with locks, bars, alarms, and a dog, which we particularly needed when my father left Mom and us two boys when I was eight. Living in that neighborhood, we felt unprotected, vulnerable at night, and alone.

The neighborhood housing projects I walked through when I began attending school in Boston were in even worse shape than ours. Some of the houses were abandoned, some were burned, and others were literally falling down altogether. But worse than the structural decay was the angry, aggressive attitude spawned by the conditions of poverty around us. No one seemed to care about the next guy, except to shake him down for money or maybe drugs. My brother, Curtis, and I were frequently bullied, and with Dad gone, Mom had to work multiple jobs just to provide. She never failed to put food on the table, however, and believed fervently that God would keep us going. I marveled at her faith, but I also wished she didn’t have to work so hard. I wished better for her and for all of us.

I hated wearing secondhand clothing and loathed going to the store to buy groceries with food stamps. If I was at the counter and someone I knew was nearby, I would get out of line as if I had forgotten something, hoping that by the time I got back to the counter no one I knew would see me paying with food stamps. In hindsight, I see this was false pride and ignorance, since many of my peers probably used the stamps too, but hatred of poverty put enough fire in me to make me work hard to escape it.

Poverty bred the attitude in me that I was a nobody, that I was going nowhere, and that I probably would never get out. So I quit school mentally before I even started. I still walked the distance from our house to the school building; Mom made sure of that. But I was lazy. I was at the bottom of my class. And most of the kids in school loved to call me by the pet name “Dummy.”

That’s when I really began to see how my feelings about poverty could affect my attitude. I developed a violent, uncontrollable temper and my grades plummeted. When Mom found out I was failing the fifth grade and that my brother, Curtis, wasn’t doing any better, she immediately instituted a program of little or no TV. We were told to focus on our homework, read books, and do book reports for her every week. Mom wanted out of the poverty too, and she knew that if we applied ourselves, we could climb out, something she had been unable to do herself. She couldn’t read the reports we wrote, but we never knew that, and the hard work paid off.

From all I observed around me growing up and all I read, I quickly realized that, in spite of the circumstances affecting you, the person who had the most to do with what happened to you in life was you. If I wanted to escape poverty, I was going to have to work extremely hard, but this was within my grasp to accomplish. And in a place such as America, no one could stop me except myself.

I nearly had stopped myself through my belief that I would never amount to anything. But instead of choosing to fuel my anger further, I turned to books as a way out. As I read about explorers, entrepreneurs, industrial leaders, and inventors, I saw a common thread in their lives of the desire and ability to work hard in order to accomplish something. I was particularly inspired by the story of Booker T. Washington, who was born a slave. It was illegal for him to read, yet he taught himself and read everything in sight. Because of that commitment to continually better his life, he eventually became an advisor to two presidents.

The story of Joseph in the Bible’s Old Testament impressed me even more. Sold into slavery by his own brothers, he didn’t hold a pity party for himself. Instead he decided that if he was going to be a slave, he would be the best slave around. Because of his industriousness and dependability, he went on to become the head of the household of Potiphar, who was captain of the Egyptian guard. Even though Joseph was unjustly imprisoned for a second time because of Potiphar’s wife’s false accusation — something that might have derailed even the most determined person, pushing him toward a victim mentality — Joseph did not feel sorry for himself. Instead he put to work those same characteristics in the prison that had enabled him to achieve a high position in Potiphar’s household. He soon had a very responsible position, and showing a skill in interpreting others’ dreams, gained the attention of the pharaoh. Ultimately he became the governor of all of Egypt.

Reading about individuals such as these profoundly affected my work ethic and made me realize that I could easily change my destiny with determined personal effort. I did not have to depend on what someone else did or what someone else gave me in order to be successful. The only thing I really needed was the opportunity to work hard and display my talents. As long as there was no one there trying to stop me or confiscate the benefits of my labor, I was willing to enthusiastically pursue my goals.





CAPITALISM: PROS AND CONS


The United States of America is the most prolific example of capitalism in the history of the world. But what exactly is capitalism? You can find many different definitions, but they all point to the fact that capitalism is an economic system in which individuals or corporate groups have the right to make private decisions and to acquire private property and capital goods based on their own work and competition in a free market. In recent years, there has been a lot of debate about whether a capitalist or socialist government would best suit the people of our nation. People are social creatures who prefer to work together, play together, eat together, and share together — but do the basic tenets of capitalism preclude these natural tendencies?

Many opponents of capitalism say that the capitalist system fosters greed and selfishness and does not look out for the welfare of one’s fellow man. If that were true, however, then the United States would have quickly dissolved into a hopelessly failed state instead of becoming the wealthiest and most powerful nation that the world has ever known.

You may be surprised to learn that it was the rapid rise of the United States as an economic power in the world that gave birth to the ideals of socialism. Many individuals in Europe and in other parts of the world were quite alarmed by the fact that relatively few people in America were making enormous sums of money while the great masses lived in poverty. They felt that it was quite unfair to have families such as the Vanderbilts, the Rockefellers, the Carnegies, the Mellons, the Kelloggs, and the Fords living lavishly, while the people around them suffered. Critics did acknowledge that these capitalists developed technologies that led to the creation of enormous wealth, but they felt that the level of wealth should be more fairly controlled and distributed by an overarching governmental agency. What those critics perhaps failed to understand is how much money each of the aforementioned families plowed back into the development of infrastructure and industries for our nation, creating an enormous number of jobs and opportunities for others to develop wealth.

Not only did America very quickly become a great economic and industrial power, but it also gave birth to the largest and most productive middle class the world had ever seen. In order for many of the businesses to succeed, it was necessary to produce in very large quantities, which of course required a great number of workers who had to be paid. Some companies were very fair to their workers and tended to do quite well; others had to be forced to be fair by unions, while still others were blatantly unfair and, in the long run, frequently suffered the consequences of such actions. Another phenomenon occurred in America which was unfamiliar to the Europeans — namely the advent of numerous charitable foundations created to aid the poor and to provide opportunities for the general populace. Obviously there was something different about the wealthy in America that distinguished them from the wealthy people in other parts of the world.

No matter how much of a fan of socialism or communism one is, it is difficult to deny the fact that entrepreneurship and inventive genius in America had a very profound effect on civilizations and living conditions throughout the world in a very short period of time. America had created an environment that provided incentive for people to come up with more and better ways of doing things. Jan Matzeliger, for example, was an African American who invented the shoe-lasting machine, revolutionizing the shoe industry and making shoes affordable by the masses with his 1883 patent.1

The establishment and protection of individual rights, woven into the founding values of our nation, extended into our business practices. The knowledge that you could acquire things for yourself and for your family by your own hard work and that those things would not be confiscated by another party was a powerful stimulus to economic activity, which quickly propelled America to the pinnacle of economic power in the world.

People throughout the world came to envy the American standard of living, and this country became the dream destination for poor immigrants everywhere.





GREED IS A FUNCTION OF THE HUMAN HEART


If the story ended there, the capitalist economic model would be declared the winner and we would all live happily ever after. Unfortunately, one of the tendencies of human nature, namely greed, often results in excessive profit taking at the expense of others.

Many years ago, a friend of mine received an academic scholarship to obtain his engineering degree at the City College of New York; however, the scholarship did not include room and board. So he was forced to live on the streets for a while, though he still maintained a healthy grade point average. For several months, he would even sneak into the professor’s lounge in the evening and hide behind one of the couches until the room was locked at night. There he would sleep behind the couch and then sneak out in the morning once the lounge was unlocked. Having access to water and a bathroom helped, but he was even more delighted when snacks were left in the lounge.

After he finished his engineering degree, he went to work for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Once while traveling, as the plane was landing, he noticed that the lady sitting next to him was extremely frightened by the plane’s unstable descent. My friend is a very smart and creative young man, and he consequently designed a stabilization system for aircraft landing. For this magnificent invention with wide applications, he was given a $500 bonus by the FAA. Feeling that his talents were unappreciated and certainly not properly compensated, he decided to seek an engineering job in the private sector. On hearing about his experience with the FAA, his new employer assured him that if he came up with another great invention he would receive 20 percent of the profits.

Well, the young man did come up with another fabulous invention — one, in fact, that resulted in a $300 million profit for the company. To celebrate their success, the company held a ceremony, during which they were going to recognize my friend for his contribution. He invited his parents and many of his friends to be present when he would receive his check for $60 million. During the ceremony, the CEO of the company called him to the stage and presented him with a plaque and a glazed ham. The next day, the young man confronted the CEO in his office and asked about the $60 million. The CEO replied that it had been decided that they would invest that $60 million in the further development of the company and that it would all be made right with him in the long run. My inventor friend tendered his resignation immediately and started to walk away when the CEO stopped him, walked over to his desk, and wrote a check for $75,000, which he handed to him. My friend tore up the check, threw it in the CEO’s face, and walked out with the intention of starting his own company.

He quickly came to realize that his goal required significant capital, and that as a twenty-two-year-old black man with a bunch of ideas and very little collateral he was going to have a very difficult time realizing his dream. He went to ten different banks seeking a business loan and he was shut out on every occasion; however, he was offered an opportunity at each bank to receive a credit card with a $20,000 limit. He accepted all ten of the credit cards and used the credit of $200,000 to start his own engineering firm. As his inventive genius was given the opportunity it needed to succeed, his company grew and prospered, and he ultimately sold it for a nine-figure amount when he retired at age forty, which was his dream. Even though he is now extremely wealthy, he continues to work and engage in charitable endeavors to advance science and engineering education in America.

My friend’s story of being taken advantage of is only one example of how greed can manifest itself within the capitalist system. Unfortunately, however, greed is a significant drawback for any economic model, including communism and socialism. No one can justify ascribing a flaw in human character to one economic model or another, for greed is a human weakness seen in all societies.

In the Bible, God instituted a system of tithing, which meant giving 10 percent of one’s profits back to God. Since God is all powerful and owns everything, he certainly does not need any percentage of our profits. So why did he institute tithing? Could it be that he understood that all human beings are subject to greed and that by requiring them to give away 10 percent of their profits they might learn a valuable lesson about not hoarding and about voluntarily sharing with others?





UP THE ECONOMIC LADDER


As a member of the Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans,2 I could easily fill this entire book with others’ inspiring rags-to-riches stories. If you think long and hard enough, you probably know someone yourself with a wonderful success story. My inventor friend worked very hard and part of his motivation was his own financial independence. But on the way to achieving financial independence, he created many jobs, and I know others who also became financially independent because of their association with this man’s company. Sometimes the creation of jobs and the wealth that are side effects of someone else’s efforts and creativity get labeled as “trickle-down economics,” because inventing needed products creates jobs and opportunities for others and therefore should be encouraged if the aim is to have a prosperous society.

Many Americans understand this correlation between their own hard work and success, a cause-effect relationship that led to the can-do attitude that brought us to the economic table with the big boys of the world when we were still a fledgling nation barely fifty years old. As our country developed, so too did a sense of personal responsibility and pride in the ability to take care of oneself and one’s family. People were willing to take menial jobs in order to support their families with the intention of increasing their knowledge and skills, thus increasing their value and eventually moving them up the economic ladder. There were a variety of economic outcomes for persons depending on their productivity and value to an organization or to their community. In other words, the harder you worked and the more value you produced, the higher you moved up the economic ladder of financial success.

Of course, there are many in our society who bring only entertainment value, and American society is as enamored with celebrity as British society is with royalty. Although I have nothing against sports and entertainment, I believe there is a danger of getting lost in a fantasy world while neglecting the serious things in life such as education and productive work. The enormous salaries paid to sports stars and entertainers lead people to believe that they are the most important people in our society, or have the most important jobs. I believe they are as important as anyone else, but we must ask ourselves what will maintain the pinnacle position of our nation in the world: the ability to shoot a twenty-five-foot jump shot, or the ability to solve a quadratic equation.

Capitalism is a system that works extremely well for someone who is highly motivated and very energetic, but it is not a great system for someone who is not interested in working hard or for someone who feels no need to contribute to the economic well-being of their community. People in the latter group frequently rationalize about their value to society and develop a sense of entitlement to the fruits of other people’s labors. In fairness, I should add that some people work extremely hard and make significant contributions to society, yet choose low-paying careers or give away most of their resources to others. Such individuals form an important part of the capitalist model. For example, you are unlikely to meet any successful person who cannot point to a teacher who played a significant, positive role in their development. In some cases it is a minister, priest, rabbi, or other spiritual mentor. Many such individuals choose a life not overflowing with material things, because they receive incalculable non-tangible rewards through the work they choose.

However, the important word here is choose, since these people have a choice, understand the consequences of those choices, and are at peace with their decisions.





THE FREEDOM OF CHOICE


I had to make a very critical choice toward the end of my neurosurgical residency, deciding whether to stay in academic medicine or go into private practice where I would earn substantially more money. Having grown up in poverty, I felt drawn toward private practice and the dream of financial independence. At the same time, I felt that I could make a contribution to medicine if I became a full-time academic neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins. After prayerful consideration, I chose the academic route, but after one and a half years, I was beginning to think I had made the wrong choice, because I was working very hard, fourteen to sixteen hours every day, doing a tremendous number of very stressful neurosurgical procedures, involving myself in several research endeavors, and making only $75,000 a year. I understand that to many readers that will seem like an enormous amount of money, but it really is a relatively meager salary for a fully trained neurosurgeon, even in an academic practice, who still has to pay off high medical school loans.

So I decided to join a private neurosurgical practice in Texas, which was going to pay me six times more than I was making at Hopkins. When I submitted my letter of resignation, it was not accepted and the powers that be convinced me that I was being hasty in my decision. They said that all of my grievances could easily be remedied and that a new salary incentive program was being implemented. I poured out my heart to God before I made the decision, trying to justify my reasons for leaving. But I felt strongly that I should stay and believed that I would be treated fairly and properly compensated for my work.

Ultimately I did decide to stay, and it turned out I could never have had the career that I’ve had if I had gone into private practice. Shortly thereafter I gained a great amount of international notoriety, which led to the writing of my first book, Gifted Hands, which has sold more than one million copies. I became a popular and well-compensated public speaker, and I was invited to sit on Fortune 500 corporate boards. The salary incentive program at Hopkins worked very well too. All of this put me in a much stronger financial position than if I had gone into private practice.

Using my God-given talents, listening to my heart, and working very hard in a capitalistic economy certainly paid large dividends for me. My wife, Candy, and I were able to realize our dream of starting a national scholarship program for children of all backgrounds, with the goal of inspiring a new generation of incredibly bright, ethical leaders to take the reins of our nation. I make no apologies for the fact that I am considered one of the rich in this nation, but I am proud of the fact that our single largest annual expense (excluding taxes) is charitable contributions, and I happen to know that that is the case with many of our personal friends who are also well-to-do.

Choice is vitally important in the capitalist economic model, for people must have the freedom to choose not only what they want to do, but how much effort they want to put into their work. It is truly a wonderful feeling to be able to voluntarily help someone who has financial needs, which they are trying unsuccessfully to resolve. It is considerably less pleasant to be forced to give your hard-earned resources to others regardless of their circumstances. Americans traditionally have been the most generous people in the world, and we should recognize and celebrate that rather than extinguish such a wonderful trait with unfair taxation. Not only should we be concerned about unfair taxation, but we also need to recognize the deleterious effect of unfair business practices and overregulation.





THE EARLY BIRD GETS THE WORM


When I was in college, one of my summer jobs was supervisor for highway cleanup crews. I directed groups of young men who picked up debris along the highway with huge plastic bags. It was quite a difficult job because the weather was so hot and there was very little shade along the expressway. Needless to say, the guys weren’t all that enthusiastic about the job. As the supervisor, I wanted us to do a good job, so I began to think of ways to give them incentives.

“You guys don’t really want to be picking up garbage in the hot sun, do you?” I asked one day after gathering them together.

“You got that right!” they shouted.

Then I said, “Why don’t we start when it’s cool out? How about six in the morning?”

“Six in the morning?” they shot back. “You must be crazy. What are they teaching you at that fancy school?”

I then went on to explain that they could work much more efficiently during the cool weather, and that I would pay them for eight hours of work if they could fill a hundred bags with garbage in seven or even six hours. Whatever amount of time it took, I would still pay them for eight hours if they accomplished the task. Well, you have never seen people work like these young men worked from that point on. By eight o’clock in the morning they would have filled more than two hundred bags with garbage and cleaned whole stretches of highway.

Those in charge of the program were flabbergasted. They were always saying, “Carson’s crews are amazing, but we never see them.”

This, to a large extent, is what the capitalistic economic model is based on. Giving incentives to work hard not only worked for them, it works for society at large. Now, I could not give the men the rest of the day off because they had to punch timecards, but as a result of their hard work, I was able to allow them to have leisurely days with extended lunch breaks and walks in the park. If I’d had the authority to pay them more money for more work, they would have been happy to continue working to make more money. Without any incentives for productivity (capitalistic model), they were quite content do nothing, which unfortunately is the by-product of any system that bases wages solely on head counts (socialistic model).





THE PARABLE OF THE WORKERS


There is definitely room to argue about whether the fruits of one’s labors should be equally distributed throughout the society or whether one should be able to directly benefit from working harder than others around him. When I was an eight-year-old boy living in Boston, I had an opportunity to earn a whole dollar and a delicious-looking candy bar with nuts and caramel in exchange for shelling several bushels of peas for a neighbor who had just purchased them from the farmers’ market. Six of us agreed, and all we had to do was sit in the kitchen and shell peas. Although it was more fun to be outside playing, we didn’t have to sit in the hot sun and we could talk while we did the work, so it wasn’t as much of a chore as it could have been. The idea of earning money and getting a nice-sized candy bar to boot was more than enough incentive for us to agree. Four of us worked extremely hard all day while two boys did virtually nothing. I was among the hard workers and at the end of the day, when the rewards were handed out, I was somewhat dismayed to see that everyone received the same compensation. The four boys who did all the work protested, but the two other boys claimed that they had done just as much, and they prevailed.

Some would say that there is a parable in the Bible that supports the two boys who did nothing, found in Matthew 20:1 – 16. In this parable focusing on grace, a land owner hires workers to work in his vineyard, agreeing to pay them a certain sum for a day’s labor. In the last hour of the working day, he hires more workers and at the end of the day pays them the same as the ones who had been working all day. The early workers are disgruntled and feel that they have been treated unfairly, but the landowner accurately points out that they had been paid the wage that was agreed upon; therefore, nothing unjust had been done to them. Furthermore, he makes the point that he has the right to do with his own money as he pleases.

This parable seems to score points for both sides, because on the one hand it advocates equal pay for everyone regardless of how much work was done by any particular person, and on the other hand it argues for the sovereignty of the landowner, who should be able to use his money any way he wants. Many capitalists would side with the early workers, while many socialists would side with the late workers, but I think the point of the parable is that you should do your own work in a responsible manner, be satisfied if you are paid according to the agreed amount, and not worry about what someone else is getting.

Each of the early workers also had the knowledge and reassurance that they would have a full day’s worth of remuneration that day and could afford to feed their families. The workers who arrived later in the day would have experienced more angst and stress in their search for work until they met up with the generous landowner. The landowner, by offering the various jobs, enabled each of the workers to experience a sense of accomplishment that they were able to provide for themselves and their families through their own efforts. The landowner could have decided to hold on to his money and spend it on something else, or place it somewhere safe (away from tax revenue collectors), rather than expanding his business.

It only complicates your life when you begin to worry about what everybody else is doing and how much everyone else has. An overreaching government might decide in this case to confiscate much of the money of the land owner and redistribute it in a more equitable fashion, at least according to its value system. Then again, if the government did not interfere, the early industrious workers would soon learn how to negotiate a better contract, since the land owner clearly had plenty of money and needed a lot of work to be done. This is how capitalism works, assuming that people are able to make decisions for themselves in their own best interests.





LET THE REWARD FIT THE PERFORMANCE


The seeds of capitalism are sown early during the educational process in this country during which young people are rewarded for superior academic performance with high grades, ribbons, medals, and various other types of recognition. They begin to develop the mind-set of winners and a can-do attitude, which is essential for success in the capitalist model. Some school districts today discourage differentiating students based on academic performance because they feel that it makes the students who do not achieve as well feel inferior. And some people feel that all teachers should also be treated the same and that it is inappropriate to reward superior teachers or to penalize inferior teachers. Such a system, however, seldom produces outstanding teachers or outstanding students. If mediocrity becomes the norm, the quantity of outstanding producers will decline, as will general prosperity.

Children are especially vulnerable to peer pressure, whether it be good peer pressure or bad peer pressure. It is definitely possible to affirm students who are not doing as well academically while still providing encouraging extra recognition for those students who are achieving the highest levels. By providing extra recognition for those outstanding students, many of the other students are encouraged to try harder. We have certainly found this to be the case with the Carson Scholars Fund, which provides scholarships for students who demonstrate both superior academic performance and humanitarian qualities. Some teachers have told us that when we put a Carson scholar in the classroom, the grade-point average of the whole class can go up by as much as one point over the next year.

When students embrace the concept of striving for excellence, it completely changes their opinion of who they are and what they can do. It did for me. Jaime Escalante was the subject of Stand and Deliver, a movie depicting his life as a teacher in the inner city, where the prevailing attitude was that calculus was way beyond the students’ capabilities. By getting to know those students individually and working with them, he was able to convince more and more of them that they were smart — after that, teaching them calculus was a piece of cake. During his tenure, that school had more advanced placement calculus students than all but three other public high schools in the country.3

The concept of rewards for production lies at the foundation of capitalism and needs to be understood. The anticipation of rewards for being productive and the fear of consequences for being unproductive are great human motivators for both young and old. Historically, when these motivators are removed, productivity declines. Nonproductive people frequently make excuses for their lack of production, and as long as they can utilize those excuses, they have no reason to change their ways. But motivate them and watch what happens.

For example, if you met someone living on the streets who had no house, no car, and very little if any money, and you were able to convince him that if he met you in Bismarck, North Dakota, in seventy-two hours that you would give him $1 million, I can virtually assure you that he would find a way to get there. People can generally find a way to do what they want to do, and they can find a hundred excuses for what they don’t want to do. When you have an entire society of people with a great work ethic and a sense of personal responsibility, that society will take off like a rocket and quickly achieve a position of power and leadership. I give you the United States of America.

Some people with a socialist agenda claim that the Bible supports their system of government because the early Christians pooled their resources and because Jesus lived like a peasant. Having read the Bible in its entirety several times, that’s not my conclusion. The early Christians had a dramatic mission to accomplish in a relatively short period of time, and without using their collective talents and resources, it would have been extraordinarily difficult to have had the impact on the whole world as quickly as they did. Also, since the vast majority of people were workers and peasants, it is likely that Jesus reasoned that his greatest impact would be among the largest segment of society, and that he was much more likely to reach them as a worker himself. Besides, great characters of the Bible such as Job, King David, King Solomon, Lot, and Abraham were people of extraordinary wealth and influence, and they became heroic figures and men of God, so that point had already been made.

In the parable of the talents,4 in fact, industry and concerted effort are praised while laziness is rejected. For those who are not familiar with this story, a master had three servants, and as he was departing for a long journey, he gave each of them a certain number of talents.5 The first servant was given five bags of money, which through his efforts he managed to double. The second servant was given two bags of money, which he managed to double also, while the third servant was given only one bag of money, which he buried in the ground, hoping to conserve it. When the master returned, he was very pleased with the efforts of the first and second servants and concluded that they were worthy of even more rewards since through their stewardship they had managed to produce even more than he had originally given them. When the third servant was asked what had become of the talent that he was given, he said to the master, “I know that you are a harsh taskmaster, therefore I buried the talent to ensure that nothing happened to it and that I would not diminish your gift.” The master was extremely angry with the servant and commanded that his talent be given to the one who had multiplied his talents the most.

This parable is remarkable in that it shows God encourages the same kind of traits that lead to entrepreneurship and business success. Being lazy and content with the status quo is shunned, while being highly industrious is praised. Since this parable was told by Jesus himself, it gives us some insight into how those who believe in the Bible and in the teachings of Christ should view the positive aspects of capitalism. You will notice that I said “the positive aspects of capitalism,” which suggests there are negative aspects as well. We have discussed greed already, which really encompasses most of the other negative aspects of capitalism, such as lack of regard for the environment.

Many of the industrialists who helped propel our country to the forefront of the global economy were much more interested in growing their businesses than they were in protecting the environment. The result? Dangerous pollution and the compromised habitat of many animals. Protecting the environment is neither a Democratic nor a Republican position, but rather it should be a logical position for capitalists and socialists, because everyone should be looking out for the interests of future generations and trying to protect their own health as well. Having a clean and healthy environment is beneficial to everyone no matter what their political persuasion. If our government were able to identify what needs to be done in our country to protect our environment, and our representatives (who are supposed to be looking out for their constituents) agreed on our policies and followed through on them, it would benefit us all.





TO WHOM MUCH IS GIVEN …


I once met legendary entrepreneur A. G. Gaston,6 a multimillionaire who had funded a significant portion of the civil rights movement in the South. He was ninety-five years old at the time, and during our conversation together at Tuskegee University in Alabama, I asked him the following question: “Mr. Gaston, how did you as a black man become a multimillionaire in Birmingham, Alabama, in the 1930s to 1950s?” For as most of you will know, Birmingham, Alabama, was a bastion of racism during that time.

“It’s very simple,” he said. “I just opened my eyes, looked around, and asked myself, what do people need? I then went about fulfilling those needs.”

In the process, he created multiple businesses, including an insurance company and a bank, and in doing so he became a very wealthy individual. But it was what he did with that wealth that was extraordinary — supporting the civil rights struggles in Birmingham and throughout the South. This is a splendid example of a capitalist who was extraordinarily compassionate and did a great deal to improve society for all of us.

Many like-minded capitalists make enormous contributions to the well-being of our society. Sometimes contributions are made on a smaller scale than that of Gaston, but all of these contributions, large or small, add up. Hundreds of thousands of bright, hard-working entrepreneurs start their own businesses to ensure their own financial security and the security of their families. In the process they create jobs for other people. In fact, small businesses create 80 percent of the private sector jobs in this country. In 2010, before the national elections, the question of whether or not to raise taxes on the “rich” (defined by the government as families with a household income of $250,000 a year or more) was widely debated. Some felt that anyone making that much money could certainly afford to pay more taxes, and in fact should do so since the vast majority of the population did not enjoy such affluence. Wealth should be redistributed fairly, they argued.

However, those who were targeted for this tax increase included many small business owners. And those with a better understanding of how capitalism works felt just as strongly that it would be a huge mistake to impose higher taxes on the very people who create the majority of private sector jobs. If you continually punish those who are economically successful through higher and higher taxes, at some point you extinguish the desire to work hard, since they will be working harder for a smaller return and their profits will increasingly go to the government. Many of the rich people in this country have been extremely generous with their money, and they are to be commended for this generosity. Some haven’t. But the government shouldn’t take from either of them against their will. The Constitution is quite clear that the government has the right to tax in order to support its programs, but there is nothing in the Constitution to support redistribution of wealth. Some proponents of big government get around this by creating many programs and then argue that these have to be supported by taxes. In this way they redistribute wealth according to their agenda. As a society we need to be mature enough to recognize that the wealthy in this nation provide many opportunities for those who are not rich by creating jobs and paying taxes. The fact is, the top 50 percent of wage earners in the United States pay 97 percent of the taxes. The top 2 percent earn 19 percent of all wages, but pay 52 percent of all taxes. Since almost 50 percent of the population pays no federal income tax at all, you can see that the more affluent constituents of society are already supporting the less fortunate to a large extent.

I am a huge proponent of humanitarian efforts, and I strongly believe that “[to whom] much is given, of him shall be much required” (Luke 12:48). This is the reason that the humanitarian component of the Carson Scholars Fund is so important. In order to be nominated for one of the scholarships, a student must not only have a near-perfect grade point average, but he or she must also demonstrate humanitarian qualities. A student cannot win if they are simply smart and successful, but don’t care about other people, for we want to encourage the same values of productivity and generosity that characterize many of the men and women who helped this nation become the world power that it is today.





CAPITALISM HAS WORKED WELL—

AND IT COULD WORK AGAIN


Capitalism has worked very well for the United States of America, but like every economic system it does have its shortcomings. There is no perfect system quite simply because there are no perfect people. Even with capitalism, some government regulation is necessary. As James Madison said, “If men were angels, no government would be necessary.”7

As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, it is true that some capitalists care only about making money and disregard the well-being of their fellow human beings and the environment. A responsible government certainly should exercise oversight in every economic model — including the capitalist model. Appropriate regulations should protect the environment and the rights of all its citizens. For example, a chemical factory should not be allowed to dump toxic waste in an area where people or significant animal populations can be harmed. By the same token, some degree of government regulation is necessary for our large financial institutions to prevent the kinds of tragedies that occurred during and immediately after the great stock market crash of 1929 and again in 2008. The real shame is that we did recognize the importance of financial regulation after the great crash of 1929 and appropriately developed safeguards in the 1930s. Unfortunately, we decided to deregulate during the 1990s, paving the way for the economic meltdown in 2008.

When it comes to defending the economic viability of our nation, it is naïve to count on the honesty and integrity of people responsible for our markets when they stand to gain so much by manipulating the system to their advantage. If we become paranoid and overregulate the financial markets, however, we will not see peak performance from them. That hurts everybody’s retirement plans with its domino effects. This is one of the reasons that a balance of viewpoints in our legislative bodies is not only healthy but also necessary. Our founding fathers understood human nature, including the desire for power and a tendency toward greed; therefore, our broad regulatory principles should be aimed at stifling excessive power and greed. We need many wise counselors focusing on the kinds of regulations that accomplish these goals without suppressing productivity and growth.

With all of the intellect that exists in our nation, it should be easy for us to come up with bipartisan, business-friendly policies to encourage businesses and manufacturers to bring their factories and offices back to our land. Logical people from both political parties should sit down with business leaders who have moved much of their business offshore and ask them why they did, then work with them to find solutions that will bring them back. We all want a prosperous and thriving nation, and if we appropriately analyze the problems that preclude prosperity, we can certainly find the solutions.

Doing so would lead to the creation of jobs, which is essential to the maintenance of the middle class, the backbone of America. A friend of mine who lives in Connecticut is a self-made multimillionaire who owns many businesses and has a very keen business mind. In order to instantly create many more jobs in the United States, he has proposed that we place a stiff tariff on products that are manufactured in other countries and are shipped here fully assembled, while reducing tariffs on products that will require assembly once they reach our shores. In order to assemble the latter group of products, many workers would have to be hired. Given the severe trade imbalance that we already are experiencing, such a policy would have a dramatic impact on the American job market. This is just one example of how government could enhance job creation, thus expanding the tax base rather than killing jobs with ever-increasing taxes.

Today we live in the information age where knowledge is power, yet — as I discussed earlier — almost one third of all our students drop out of high school before graduation.8 In many inner-city schools the dropout rate is considerably higher than that. It is time for corporate America and the rest of society to band together to stop the hemorrhaging and give these young people the incentive and tools to complete their education and become a part of a “can-do” society versus a “what can you do for me” society. For a well-functioning capitalistic society cannot sustain itself without a steady supply of enthusiastic and hard-working individuals who are excited about achieving the American dream.





— CHAPTER 6 —





SOCIALISM:

WHOSE POT

OF SOUP IS IT?


SINCE MY MOTHER had only a third-grade education and was functionally illiterate, there weren’t many lucrative job opportunities available to her. To compensate, she worked two and sometimes even three jobs, cleaning the houses of wealthy families and caring for their children. She frequently left the house at five in the morning and did not return until midnight, which meant that Curtis and I would sometimes not see her for several days at a time. When she was at home, you could see the fatigue in her eyes, but the little time and energy she did have, she always spent on Curtis and me. It was clear that whether she was working or spending time with us, she wanted us to have a better life than the one we had.

When other families went on outings, for example, we couldn’t. There simply wasn’t enough money. Every once in a while, however, Mother would save up enough for us to go to the fair, but only enough for us to get in the gate — we had to enjoy the rides by watching others. We couldn’t try our hand at any of the games, no matter how much we practiced pitching coins or playing basketball at home. Most adults can recall wonderful childhood tastes from nibbling on cotton candy, hot dogs, french fries, ice cream, and rainbow-colored snow cones, but Curtis and I had to be content to only smell — never taste.

Being unable to give us many of the little joys of childhood weighed heavily on Mother. When we’d arrive at the checkout counter in a grocery store and have to run the inevitable gauntlet of assorted candies, we’d ask her if we could have something “this time,” but the answer was always no. The look in her eyes was so devastating that after a while we wouldn’t even ask. There was no money for a babysitter either, so Curtis and I were pretty much left on our own.

But Mother was always creative in coming up with ways for us to make ends meet. In the summertime, for example, when farmers’ crops were ready for harvest, she would drive us out to the country on the weekend, stop at a farmhouse, and offer to pick four bushels of a crop if we could keep one. Farmers usually complied, and we’d bring home fresh vegetables or fruit, such as strawberries, peaches, tomatoes, and green beans. Although we may have complained about the work, it was fun picking produce together as a family. And once we returned home, she would can many of the items to sustain us during the winter months.

Most of Mother’s friends and relatives also struggling with economic hardship were quite happy to lean on public assistance. As a child, I overheard many conversations in which they detailed schemes — some of which were quite elaborate — for obtaining more government aid. Take a course in a community college, I heard them say, to make it appear that you are trying to escape welfare. That will get you extra money for child care. Your social worker, who will be so happy and proud of you, can be easily manipulated. By the time they grow weary of their work and move on, another one will have been assigned to your case. I often wonder what they could have accomplished if they had spent that intellectual energy developing a new business. My mother steadfastly resisted her friends’ lifestyle because, even though she only had a third-grade education, she had noticed that almost no one who became a welfare mom ever came off of welfare, and she was repulsed by the thought of perpetually depending on others.

The attitude of my mother’s friends and relatives was very similar to that of the students in a course I took in school, in which only two grades were given: satisfactory and unsatisfactory. Many of the students in that particular class — who usually strove to excel — relaxed and set aside any notion of spending long hours studying to get an A on an exam, let alone working for extra credit. After all, they knew they would receive at best a grade of satisfactory no matter how hard they worked. On the one hand, it comforted many students to know that they would pass the course without ever having to extend themselves much — but on the other hand, it discouraged many students from working hard to achieve excellence.

Some might question the wisdom of my mother’s drive toward self-sufficiency and her no-nonsense parenting of us boys, but I believe the proof is in the pudding: one son became an aviation engineer and the other became a neurosurgeon, two of the most prestigious professions. Many children of the wealthy clients for whom she worked managed to only just get by in life or worse — some ended up dead, in the penal system, or on welfare.

My journey from inner-city poverty to board-certified neurosurgeon was arduous and expensive, as it is for anyone who decides to become a doctor. Today, even those from middle-class families graduate from medical school with student debt equivalent to the mortgage on a house. They are not able to pay off those debts for several more years because they also have to complete an internship — and, in many cases, several years of residency with very modest wages. Doctors today are frequently well into their thirties by the time they are able to even begin addressing their debts. In many other countries, medical education is completely subsidized by the government, because they realize that the physicians will contribute substantially to the well-being of their society. Since the graduating doctors in those countries are not saddled with the burden of great financial debt, they are free to choose the area of medicine that appeals most to them without focusing on the salary of any given specialty.

The question then is, are there aspects of socialism that are worth keeping or incorporating into the fabric of our society? Or does capitalism have the upper hand when it comes to solutions?





RISKS AND REWARDS


In the United States, physicians in high-paying specialties are increasing much faster than primary care physicians, largely because graduating doctors choose their specialties based on the amount of debt they have incurred rather than based on their interests and talents. This is a problem that we can solve quickly and relatively inexpensively by eliminating or greatly reducing medical school tuition. By embracing a positive aspect of socialism, medical education would be subsidized for the good of the entire nation. Admitting there are beneficial aspects of socialism, however, does not obligate us to completely reorient our nation’s economic system. The resulting increase in the number of primary care physicians would address many of the problems that patients in this country currently face regarding access to doctors.

However, in the same way that capitalists and socialists differ over who should pay for and receive benefits, tension exists in the medical community over the disparity in salaries among the specialties. Those in the lower-paying specialties frequently resent what they consider excessive salaries paid to specialists such as cardiothoracic surgeons and neurosurgeons. In multispecialty practices or academic medical centers, those lucrative specialty departments usually subsidize the other departments, making things more equitable. I bring this up because this paradigm reflects our society at large and is somewhat analogous to the argument between capitalism and socialism. Capitalists would say that those who work the longest and hardest, and are exposed to the most risk, should receive the greatest financial rewards, while socialists would say that everyone has essentially equal training and the same general profession, thus it is unfair for one to receive more compensation than another.

It is easy to see validity in both points of view upon a superficial analysis; however, a deeper look at the differences between the specialties is revealing. Certain specialties, such as neurosurgery and obstetrics, face enormous medico-legal costs because we continue to leave tort reform — legal reform aimed at reigning in out-of-control lawsuits within the health-care sector — unaddressed. In some of our major cities such as Philadelphia and Chicago, the average malpractice premium for a neurosurgeon exceeds $300,000 annually. It is also commonly accepted that the three most stressful occupations are 911 operator, air traffic controller, and neurosurgeon. Neurosurgeons generally die several years earlier than the population at large. I recently went back and calculated the average age of death of ten neurosurgeons that I knew personally and was shocked to discover the number to be in the lower sixties. I’m hopeful that that age is now on the rise since more attention is being placed on the number of hours worked and alleviation of stress, but we still have a long way to go. Many people in surgical specialties also have to retire earlier because physical skills decline more quickly than mental skills. Although many wish to deny it, vision and dexterity at age seventy is unlikely to be comparable to the same at age thirty. So when one takes into account years of training, amount of stress, life expectancy, and earlier retirement, it should be easy to see that few people would consider certain specialties if there were no differential remuneration. This is not to say that these individuals are only interested in money, but in a capitalistic society, risk taking and sacrifice are frequently rewarded financially.





WHICH WAY ARE IMMIGRANTS FLOWING?


Not long ago, Candy and I had an opportunity to visit Cuba with a group of young American business leaders. There the government essentially owns and controls everything, including where people live, what they do for a living, and how much they earn. Certain people who are smiled on by the government are allowed to rent elegant accommodations and enjoy a privileged lifestyle, while the vast majority of the population must be satisfied with meager resources. However, their basic health-care needs are taken care of and they are unlikely to be homeless or starving.

A university professor in Cuba makes little more than an unskilled laborer — and in some cases less. In addition, many of our waiters and waitresses had advanced education degrees, but found that they could earn more money waiting tables. The many street vendors and performers in the main city squares created a festive façade, but having spoken to many Cuban refugees, I could only sympathize with the masses of people and hope that someday they can experience true freedom. Although some people, such as the documentary filmmaker Michael Moore, extol the virtues of Cuban society, the tide of illegal immigration is from Cuba to America, not vice versa. More people seem to prefer freedom with the opportunity to create security than security without freedom. If people could freely choose which type of society they preferred to live in, life would be very fair. Unfortunately, although Americans are free to leave this country any time they want to go live somewhere else, such privileges are not afforded to the average Cuban or those in many other countries where the government controls their lives.





IN SOCIALISM, SOME ARE STILL MORE

EQUAL THAN OTHERS


To be fair, some people love socialism’s ideas, which they see as bringing about a utopian existence. They feel there is less conflict and competition when everyone is treated the same. But does the socialist ideal of equality hold?

One summer, I worked at a Chrysler plant in Detroit as a preassembly line worker, monotonously welding hour after hour. It was quite boring work, and I received a decent salary whether I worked hard or decreased my production. What I really wanted to do was be a driver who moved the finished product from the end of the assembly line to a large parking lot. Those jobs went to a privileged few with connections in the company. However, I worked so hard at my job that eventually management noticed and gave me my dream job as a driver.

In socialistic systems, as in capitalist ones, intelligence and diligence are often eventually noticed, and individuals are moved into privileged positions. In other words, you could say that although everyone is equal in socialism, some are more equal than others. So differential treatment is a part of socialism just as it is in capitalism, but in the latter system, self-dependency and self-reliance play the larger role in one’s advancement, whereas in the former system, currying favor with the powers that be and hoping to be noticed plays the larger role in advancement.





DOES SOCIALISM’S SAFETY NET HOLD OR EVENTUALLY TEAR UNDER THE WEIGHT?


One of the most appealing aspects of socialism is the safety net it provides for its citizens. Because all resources are supposedly distributed in an equitable fashion, there should be enough money, food, and services to provide everyone with a reasonable lifestyle. Theoretically, socialism eliminates the disparity between some living with great wealth while others live in poverty. This system requires that the government have intimate knowledge of everyone’s personal property and resources in order to be able to redistribute wealth. Although most Americans have great compassion for those less fortunate than themselves, very few would agree to involuntarily sharing all they had earned by their hard work with people they didn’t even know.

When I was growing up, a homeless man came to our church one Sabbath, and he kept talking about how hungry he was. My mother had made an enormous pot of chili, my favorite food, so she invited the man home for dinner. I have never seen anyone eat so many bowls of chili, but he was eventually satisfied, as was my mother. I saw many acts of kindness by my family and many others over the years, and I believe that generosity is part of the American way of life. However, I suspect that my mother would have been quite unhappy if a government agent had come along and confiscated her chili in order to share it with others who had nothing to eat. She would have felt that it was her chili, and that she had the right to share with whomsoever she wished. And therein lies one of the fundamental differences between capitalism and socialism.

Socialism’s underlying goal of sharing with others is noble. But amazingly, many Americans who are having financial difficulty would reject the idea of the government confiscating the assets of the wealthy to balance things out. This attitude bewilders many who believe in “taxing the rich” and redistributing that wealth as the solution to everything. Many of those seeking to gain political advantage in our system recognize that there are far more poor people than there are rich people, and that by stirring up class warfare they can create an enormous power base for themselves. So far this political strategy has failed to yield the promised fruit because most Americans value freedom above financial security, just as centuries ago the colonists rejected the protection promised by the British Crown, coupled with its ever-increasing taxes.



As a testament to how socialism’s safety net can begin to tear under the strain, in 2010, several financially distressed countries — Greece and Ireland as the prominent examples — experienced dramatic shortages of money, making it impossible for them to continue their overly generous social programs the general populace had come to expect. Massive protests and violent rioting broke out in the streets because people felt robbed of what they felt was their rightful share of the country’s production. These countries had overextended themselves in terms of the benefits they had promised and simply could not take in enough revenue to fulfill their obligations. This unfortunately has happened in the past and will happen in the future because government-controlled programs continue to grow until they destroy themselves. The founding fathers of this nation were well aware of the perils associated with gigantic government programs, which is why they emphasized limited government and self-reliance. All you have to do is look at Greece and Ireland today to see the results of unrealistic promises made to the populace.

We can already see some of these socialist bubbles being popped here in our own nation. In the not too distant past, public service jobs in the United States usually paid less than private-sector jobs and didn’t have as many benefits. It was indeed sacrificial public service. Today, government jobs pay on average 20 percent more than private-sector jobs of the same type and have mind-boggling benefits — all at the taxpayers’ expense. Furthermore, if you have ever tried to deal with a government bureaucracy, you probably know how difficult it is to find caring and competent people. For many people, a government job is a ticket to an easy life. The founders of our nation intended for government workers to be representatives and servants of their communities rather than beneficiaries, and they never intended for public servants to be economically better off than the general populace. Such overcompensation places an enormous strain on government budgets, necessitating increased tax rates.

The desire to take care of everyone from cradle to grave is laudable, but I’m also pragmatic and realize that one can only take care of everyone until there’s no more money, at which time one can take care of no one — or one can reduce the amount of financial aid and encourage people to live responsibly, to save, and to plan for the future. Obviously the latter option makes more sense in the long run. For some reason, in recent decades our national leaders have stopped looking so much at the long-term issues facing our country and have concentrated on short-term stopgap measures that temporarily make them look good politically.

The problem of caring for the indigent still remains, and as Jesus himself said, “The poor you will always have with you.” Some are poor due to mental or physical illness and/or bad luck, and others are poor because they have no desire to work hard. There is a growing third group, however — those who work hard at lower-middle-class, blue-collar jobs, but whose salaries are unable to keep up with the inflation of a reckless government fiscal policy over the past few decades, resulting in real wages failing to keep up with the cost of living for a family. Should we make a distinction between these groups when doling out social benefits?

Believers in the capitalistic model are not likely to have a great deal of sympathy for those individuals who want to live off the labor of others, while believers in the socialistic model make provisions even for those individuals. I suspect, however, that if you took one hundred people and placed them in a capitalistic society for several months, you would find most of them gainfully employed a year later. If you took that same one hundred people and placed them in a socialistic society for several months, I suspect that a year later you would find a large number of them “on the dole.” People tend to do what they need to do to survive and are unlikely to expend extra effort when it is unnecessary. This is the primary reason why traditionally socialistic societies are not highly productive.





HOW THEN SHALL WE LIVE?


There is no one-size-fits-all type of government, and much to the horror of some people, it is a fact that our own government is a blend of both capitalism and socialism. The issue, then, of how to handle able-bodied individuals who simply do not want to work in a society with mixed government, such as in the United States, remains very sticky. The issue can be demagogued endlessly by both sides without arriving at a solution. Approaching the issue logically, however, there are three practical solutions:

Tell those who don’t work that they are on their own.

Take from those who have something and redistribute it to the individuals who aren’t working.

Borrow from a third party in order to take care of the nonworking individuals and leave the debt to future generations.



Logically, with solution 1, the individual who isn’t working clearly either starves or finds a job. What about solution 2? In this case, those who are forcibly constrained to support the individuals who aren’t working eventually lose interest in working themselves, since the fruits of their labors are being confiscated. This, in turn, leads to even more individuals who aren’t working. What about solution 3? The other party buys our treasury notes in great quantities, thereby acquiring ownership of a significant portion of our nation. But these investors are unlikely to extend credit indefinitely, nor will future generations continue to remain ignorant of this downward spiral forever. At some point, they will realize that their future is being compromised, and they will refuse to go along with the program. Thus solution 1 is the only one that stands the test of logic and is the one upon which we should concentrate.

Necessity is the mother of invention, and right now it is necessary for us to create jobs while providing incentives to entrepreneurs and CEOs to keep coming up with new innovations and products. We must realize that excessive pay for executives is demoralizing to workers who don’t feel that someone else in the same organization is worth well over three hundred times more than they are.1 Fortunately “say on pay” arrangements have entered corporate America recently, which allows shareholders to have a voice in compensation for top executives and makes boards of directors more careful in determining organizational compensation.

Is it possible to implement solution 1 in a compassionate fashion? Of course it is when compromise is introduced into the equation. Instead of immediately kicking individuals off the dole, they could be weaned off over the course of several months, giving them the opportunity to make necessary adjustments in their lives. Again I should point out that we are only talking about able-bodied individuals who are capable of working but simply refuse to do so. I doubt that anyone in America would raise serious objections to taking care of individuals who simply are not capable of caring for themselves. Unemployment benefits certainly can be a stopgap measure for those truly seeking employment, but temporarily out of work. They are, however, not a favor to many who are not truly seeking work, because the longer an unemployed individual is not working, the less employable he or she becomes. Such benefits should be linked to work that needs to be done in the community, such as Roosevelt’s New Deal,2 in which government programs were created to provide jobs and stimulate growth in industry, transportation, banking, housing, agriculture, and many other areas.





WHO DECIDES WHOSE HOUSE IT IS?


So what is the role of government when it comes to taking care of the poor? We can probably answer this question more easily if we leave off labels such as capitalism and socialism, and instead focus on principles. Government is invested with power by the people, who are governed because it is much easier and more orderly to have a central authority than for each person to serve as an authority unto himself. Natural law dictates that people have a right to protect their lives and their property, and this is a concept with which there is general societal agreement across all types of governmental systems throughout the history of the world.

As an example, we live in a large country estate about thirty miles outside the city of Baltimore. Our kids are grown and have their own homes, and Candy and I are very content. We have no neighbors within shouting distance, and the drive from our front door to the public road is three quarters of a mile. If someone who lived nearby presented himself on our doorstep and demanded that we trade houses with him because he has a large family with many children and they need the space, whereas we have very few people and an extremely large house, I could refuse or I could voluntarily comply. If I refused and he became belligerent and attempted to forcibly evict us, I could attempt to protect my property, which could have some very unpleasant results, or I could call the police, which is an appropriate arm of our government, whose duty includes the protection of my property and my life. This is exactly what the founding fathers envisioned as one of our governmental functions. If, on the other hand, our government officials decided my house was too big and the neighbor’s house too small for his large family, and that they should confiscate my house and give it to my neighbor — or at the very least tax me at a high enough rate that they could redistribute money to my neighbor, who could then buy a bigger house — that kind of intrusive government would exemplify the very thing our founding fathers tried to avoid.

Not only did Benjamin Franklin, Samuel Adams, and several of the other founding fathers speak out against government redistribution of property, but in 1795 the Supreme Court of the United States declared, “No man would become a member of a community in which he could not enjoy the fruits of his honest labor and industry. The preservation of property, then, is a primary object of the social compact…. The legislature, therefore, has no authority to make an act divesting one citizen of his freehold, and vesting it in another, without a just compensation. It is inconsistent with the principles of reason, justice and moral rectitude; it is incompatible with the comfort, peace and happiness of mankind; it is contrary to the principles of social alliance and every free government; and lastly, it is contrary to the letter and spirit of the Constitution.”

In our attempt to be kind to the poor, we have deviated substantially from the principles involved in the founding of our nation. The United States is, in fact, historically and currently the most philanthropic nation in the history of the world. But our founders fully realized that prolonged government-sponsored charity would destroy the values of hard work, self-reliance, and compassion.

I am involved with a number of charitable organizations that are dedicated to improving the lives of the many unfortunate people who live among us. One of those organizations is the Curtis D. Robinson Men’s Health Institute at St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford, Connecticut. The driving force behind this organization — which screens hundreds of men without medical insurance for prostate cancer, and offers free treatment when cancer is found — is my friend Curtis D. Robinson, who traveled from Alabama to Connecticut when he was sixteen years old and penniless. He was very industrious, worked extremely hard, became CEO and owner of various businesses, and is now a multimillionaire. He has given away seven-figure amounts, receiving nothing in return except the satisfaction of knowing that lives that would have been lost are being saved. Many physicians, administrators, and caring citizens have joined Curtis in his efforts, as have I. It is very difficult to travel to any community in our nation and not find charitable organizations specifically created to aid the indigent citizens of that community.

Our government used to fully understand the role of private-sector charitable organizations in ameliorating the plight of the poor. This is why the government offered tax deductions and exemptions for churches and other charitable organizations. Today the government actually competes with many of these private-sector charities while still offering them tax deductions. How does this wasteful duplication benefit government or us, its citizens? Certainly by creating huge government entitlement programs, the size and power of the government increases dramatically. Before long, people generally depend on government for everything from food and shelter, to health care and education, to a comfortable retirement, instead of looking to government for the basic protection of life and property, as well as providing public roads and public safety.

I believe Benjamin Franklin was one of the wisest men to ever walk the face of the Earth. Was he a womanizer who enjoyed partying a bit too much? Probably! But he was a first-rate scholar, scientist, inventor, writer, and diplomat who was instrumental in the formation of our nation. He warned against inappropriate compassion, such as giving a drunk the wherewithal to buy liquor or smothering the human instinct to strive and excel by providing all basic necessities. I don’t think you can say that he was selfish and simply wanted to preserve his wealth, because the same Benjamin Franklin offered to pay the British from his own bank account for their losses during the Boston Tea Party in order to spare the colonists severe retribution by the King.3 Statements by Franklin and many of the other founders make it very clear that they were extremely opposed to the concept of wealth redistribution, which is a basic tenet of socialism.4

At an even more fundamental level, they were very much opposed to the concept of a large, intrusive central government, which they felt was really no different than the European monarchies they were trying to escape. Consider the United States’ rapid acceleration to pinnacle status by means of a system rewarding hard work and vigorously protecting individual assets while encouraging compassion and charity — why would we want to change unless there is historical proof that another system will work better?

In a socialist society, the government has the right to tax whomever it wishes for whatever amount it deems necessary, whenever it wants. This leads to abusive, unchecked power that can eventually deprive many of the people of their rights — as our Declaration of Independence states — to enjoy life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The insidious nature of socialism, cloaked in a façade of compassion, makes it very dangerous to an uneducated and trusting populace. And as socialism creates dependency, it is well on its way to eliminating freedom of choice and incentives for high productivity and innovation.





UNIONS: STRANGLING THE GOOSE THAT

LAID THE GOLDEN EGG


Stealth socialism has the ability to stay under the radar while co-opting legitimate entities such as unions, changing them into something that is barely recognizable. I have been a union member myself, and having grown up in Detroit, I am of course very familiar with the positive aspects of union representation.5 In the early days of the Industrial Age, the advent of unions brought about the kind of collective bargaining that resulted in fair wages and reasonable working conditions. Benefits derived through unions helped create the most prolific middle class the world has ever seen. Unfortunately, with time, many of the union bosses began to concern themselves with power and influence, and used union dues (which had grown to become huge pots of money) to change the outcome of elections and to wreak havoc in many areas where money equaled power. By threatening strikes to further their causes, they were able to exact excessive wages and benefits from companies such as General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler, in the long run crippling these companies and rendering them noncompetitive. The union leaders, their lawyers, accountants, and administrators were not dumb people, and they were well aware of the position they were putting these companies in. Essentially they were strangling the goose that laid the golden egg. The blame for the recent downfall of Detroit’s auto industry, however, does not rest solely on the shoulders of the union bosses. Top management in the auto industry negotiated deals that they knew were fiscally irresponsible and would be harmful to the company’s future. They also knew that they would receive their golden parachutes — complete with multimillion-dollar severance packages for their irresponsibility — and be long gone when the day of reckoning arrived.

One of the themes you may have begun to notice is that those entities that are bad for our nation tend to want what they want now, without thought to how it will affect future generations. If you use that principle as a measuring stick, in most cases you can easily determine which unions and other entities are good and which are deleterious to the prosperity of our nation.

As this book is being written, massive protests are going on in the state of Wisconsin, where teachers’ unions and state workers’ unions are disgruntled about the governor’s plan to bring the wildly out-of-control state budget back under control. One of the components of his plan involves having those workers make larger contributions to their own benefit packages rather than saddling taxpayers with that responsibility. Even with the increased amount of contribution, these workers will still be getting a much better and cheaper benefits package than their counterparts in the private sector. They realize this, and are therefore capitulating to that requirement. However, they are not willing to relent on the issue of decreased collective-bargaining rights. They feel that if they give on this point, the union will be weakened forever, and they will be at a significant disadvantage when negotiating for future benefits and rights. They do not want to be at a disadvantage when it comes to issues such as class size, tenure, and evaluation of teacher competency. Of course, none of these come under the traditional banner of collective bargaining. The union leaders are focused solely on what they want, and refuse to believe that the huge budget deficit is real. They believe the whole issue has been fabricated by the governor and his cronies in order to bring down the unions, but the accounting is fairly straightforward — Wisconsin is but one of many states in dire straits, facing enormous deficits in revenue. It is almost incomprehensible to me how selfish one must be to demand benefits today without consideration for what happens to our children tomorrow. Nevertheless, I do not see those who disagree with me as enemies, and I am happy to engage them in conversations about our future and how to ensure success for our children.





CAPITALISM VS. SOCIALISM: CAN WE INCORPORATE THE BEST OF BOTH WORLDS?


The security provided by socialistic governments can be addicting to the point that citizens are willing to give up many of their individual rights. Although you have the right to accumulate wealth, there is not much incentive to do so if it can be confiscated by the government at will. Although you have the right to work many years beyond the traditional age of retirement, many who are addicted to the socialist system retire as early as possible. In many European countries, citizens often take advantage of this while they are in their fifties. As a result, those societies lose some of their most experienced and effective workers (and potential mentors), who do not want to miss out on overly generous retirement benefits guaranteed to them by a bloated government. When government interferes too much in the private lives of its citizens, the losses can become widespread.

In the previous chapter, we examined the enormous benefits to our country and to the world of an economic system (capitalism) that encourages innovation, hard work, and entrepreneurship. Now, after examining the pros and cons of socialism, we have seen mostly negative effects, even in terms of its lauded compassionate components, which seem good at first glance, but reveal disincentives to work and fiscal irresponsibility in the long run. Because we live in a free and open society, those who advocate socialism are free to do so, but for the well-read individual, it is easy to discern the agenda of the socialists and how they are implementing that agenda in an attempt to bring fundamental change to America.6 The agenda? Total government control. For jobs, income, you name it. Anytime you give to government the responsibility and authority to provide government-made jobs, old-age financial security, “free” health care, and “free” education and indoctrination of children, it will control the lives of the people who live under its jurisdiction, and individual liberty and freedom of choice are sacrificed.

Sure, there are several different brands of socialism — at least as many types as there are would-be people-planners who wish to impose their plans to control the moral and economic lives of other people. But are you willing to surrender your precious liberties to a socialist state which promises “security” for everyone and government-enforced equality? Isn’t this what Hitler and other socialists promised the German people in his Nazi (national socialist) platform — a country in which government guarantees security and “equality” in exchange for giving up individual freedom? Will Americans fall for the same scam?

Since Americans are by nature individualistic and entrepreneurial, by definition, then, the socialist program is anti-American, to say nothing of totalitarian.

Socialism is an old dream. Some dreams are nightmares when put into practice.

It is possible, however, to extract socialism’s positive aspects and actually implement them within capitalism. For example, providing basic health care for every citizen can be done quite easily without increasing our national debt one penny. If we address our inefficient and wasteful billing and collections procedures, move to a national electronic medical record, provide people with incentives to use clinics instead of emergency rooms for primary care, and engage in meaningful tort reform to limit costly lawsuits, we would have plenty of money to provide basic health care to all citizens of this country. We could also realize significant revenue by combating fraud in government entitlements such as Medicare and Medicaid. And in our free society, individuals wanting to purchase additional health-care insurance could certainly do so without negatively impacting anyone else.

Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and our food stamp program, among others, are all socialist-leaning programs that help provide our nation with a social safety net. Their growth, however, must be controlled, and self-sufficiency must be the goal of our society. The masses should not depend solely upon these social programs; instead, they should be encouraged early in life to make provisions for themselves and their families well into the future.

If we steadfastly resist the excessive growth of government and its ever-increasing appetite for tax money, reminding our government that there is a document known as the Constitution of the United States that defines and limits its role in our lives, then we will have an opportunity to learn from past mistakes and build on successes to create the kind of nation that will continue to work for all of us.





— CHAPTER 7 —





WHAT IS A

MORAL NATION?


I’VE ALWAYS BEEN A COMPASSIONATE PERSON — sometimes to a fault. After finishing high school and while pursuing my goal of becoming a physician, i befriended a young man whose personal troubles were interfering with his studies, putting him in grave danger of flunking out if he failed to pass the final comprehensive exam. Since his mind was so confused with all that was going on in his life at the time, he had been incapable of retaining material and had no chance of passing. Knowing me to be a very honest person with a deep relationship with God and a strong moral code of ethics, he was terrified to ask me what he felt was his only remaining choice: he wanted me to allow him to copy my answers.

This presented me with a great moral dilemma, because he was a good person who was normally quite capable of passing the exam; I knew that once he got through his personal problems, he would be fine. I tried hard to justify my involvement in cheating, and in the end I did indeed allow him to look at my answers, even though I knew it was wrong. He passed the exam with my help and went on to become a very successful professional who has made a positive difference in the lives of hundreds, if not thousands of people.

In this case, did the end justify the means? He had already gone to the administration requesting a leave of absence and was told that his only option was to pass the exam. Nevertheless, if he had exerted enough effort, I feel confident that another solution could have been found. I regret cheating, but I am profoundly happy for his success today.

Not long after that, when I was a psychology major delving into the mysteries of the human mind, I stepped unknowingly into yet another moral dilemma. During my research for one of the papers in an advanced psychology course, I found some passages that seemed particularly appropriate, and I included them in my writing. I did not, however, indicate that this was the work of someone else; frankly, I had never even heard of the term plagiarism.

When the professor asked me to make an appointment to discuss my paper, I was befuddled. When I stepped into his office, however, I could immediately sense the weight of the moment. He pointed out that I had plagiarized and told me that the consequences for doing so normally included expulsion. I could see all of my dreams of becoming a doctor dashed by my stupidity. Even though I did not know the implications of plagiarism, I certainly should have known inherently that what I was doing was wrong. I had done it before without consequences and probably would have continued doing it if I had not been caught. Fortunately for me, the professor was very compassionate, realized that I was naïve, and gave me a chance to rewrite the paper.

This raises another question: Is ignorance an acceptable excuse for unethical behavior? Certainly those who sanctioned slavery in America thought that black people were inferior and that they were actually doing them a favor by liberating them from the jungles of Africa to associate with “superior beings.” How easy it is to suppress morality for the sake of expediency. They tried every form of rationalization to justify something that they knew was immoral and totally opposed to the self-evident truths that were part of the founding of this nation, namely that “all men are created equal.”

But even that phrase raises questions about equality and how we treat our fellow man. When I was a medical student in Michigan, many of our clinical rotations took place at the county hospital, and a large number of the patients served at this facility were indigent and had no means of paying the hospital bills. Those patients were assigned to the service controlled by the chief resident — not yet an attending physician — while the patients with insurance were assigned to one of the attending physicians with more experience. The chief resident could consult with any attending physician about cases on his service, but he would be the primary caregiver. This meant that there was a double standard of care quality based on a patient’s ability to pay. This practice was common throughout the nation at that time, but has now been largely abandoned. One could legitimately argue that charity cases should be grateful for whatever they can get and that there is nothing immoral about differentiating the care that people receive based on status.

As a society, we make life-and-death decisions all the time based on status. When a disaster occurs, we evacuate children and women first. If a boat is sinking, the lifejackets go to the most vulnerable passengers. This greatly complicates the task of deciding what is or is not moral. In the case of the patients at the county hospital, they all received excellent care, and the majority of them did not even realize that their primary caregiver was a resident rather than an attending physician. Also, it is imperative that resident physicians assume significant responsibility in patient care before they become attending physicians. Every great attending physician was once a resident in need of experience that could only be gained by managing a patient’s agenda directly. Having said that, I have no doubt that many would argue vociferously that it is immoral to have such distinctions in patient care. They would say the patients should be randomly assigned to caretakers — including residents — which would give resident physicians the necessary experience to one day assume the role of attending physician.

A few years ago, I was consulted by a woman who was thirty-three-weeks pregnant with a baby who had been diagnosed by ultrasound to have hydrocephalus or water on the brain. She was on her way to Kansas at the recommendation of her local obstetrician to have an abortion, as Kansas was the only state that would allow a baby to be aborted that was perfectly viable outside the womb without life support. I discussed with her in great detail the implications of having a baby with hydrocephalus, and I discussed with her the many options that were available. In the end, she decided to complete the pregnancy, and we were able to place a shunt in the baby after it was born to divert excess fluid away from the brain. Although the baby had some developmental delays, she continues to thrive today.

Some years ago, I was discussing this case with the head of the ACLU, who had made a statement that the purpose of their organization was to speak for and defend those who could not speak for and defend themselves. I asked whether or not this thirty-three-week-old fetus qualified as a human being incapable of speaking for or defending itself. He artfully dodged answering the question, so I decided to make it easier for him. I told him that there were many premature infants in our neonatal intensive care unit who were several weeks younger than the baby in question. These babies were on life support, but in most cases we had every expectation that they would survive. I asked him if he would speak for and defend the rights of a twenty-eight-week-old baby who was in an incubator and on life support. He replied that that was a no-brainer; of course the ACLU would defend such an individual. As you might imagine, I then asked why it was difficult to defend a baby that was five weeks further along in development and was in the most protected environment possible, but easy to defend a less viable individual who was outside of the womb. He realized his answers were not logical, he said, but he felt that ultimately a woman had the right to terminate a pregnancy until the second that the child is born. This situation perhaps crystallizes one of the major moral dilemmas we face in American society today: Does a woman have the right to terminate another human life because it is encased in her body? Does ownership convey absolute power of life and death over the owned subject? If it does, then NFL quarterback Michael Vick was unfairly imprisoned for torturing and killing dogs in Atlanta.





STILL PAYING FOR OUR SORDID MORAL PAST


During some of our darker periods of American history, when slavery was legal, slave owners felt they had the right to do anything they wanted to their slaves since they were their property. They believed with a passion that the abolitionists were interfering in matters that did not concern them, and they saw no reason why they could not sexually abuse their slaves, beat them, torture them — even kill them at will. But in spite of the concept of one human owning another being so fundamentally despicable and immoral, we were one of the last nations to abolish slavery.

It is not difficult to see why it took the United States so long to join other civilized nations of ridding ourselves of this atrocity. Slave labor was essential to the financial well-being of our fledgling nation, and without it, our struggle for recognition and economic power would probably have had a different outcome.

Since the Bible admonishes slaves to be obedient to their masters, slave owners felt that there was a biblical “stamp of approval” for their activities, which allowed them to live with their guilt. The fact that people willfully broke up families simply for economic gain shows how easily we humans can ignore and justify indescribable inhumanity to our fellow man when we stand to benefit personally. Of course, some slave owners treated their slaves with some degree of respect and even love. Such individuals were in turn respected and loved by their slaves. Such a relationship in no way justifies the institution of slavery, but simply points out a multiplicity of complex relationships.

Not all Americans were in favor of slavery; in fact, the opposition by some was so strong that it threatened to destroy the fragile union that existed between the original thirteen colonies. This sentiment was strongly voiced in the delegates’ discourse in 1787, during the convention in Philadelphia called to revise the Articles of Confederation. Abolitionists led by the Quakers were relentless in their calls for doing away with slavery. After intense and rancorous debates, representatives from the smaller states and larger states finally agreed on a compromise: they would allow the slave states to join the union, but slaves would only be counted as three-fifths of a person for the purposes of establishing the appropriate number of representatives for each state. This was also supposed to be a temporary situation, and there was a general understanding in the union that slavery would soon be abolished because it was both immoral and inconsistent with the concept of a nation for, of, and by the people. Nevertheless, slavery continued for another three-quarters of a century, accompanied by untold atrocities, including vicious rapes and murders. Immorality was widespread, no matter how you looked at it.

I don’t think many question whether slavery was immoral or not; obviously it was, but does that mean that we continue to tip the scales the other way forever because of mistakes that were made more than a century ago? Certain individuals feel that the United States cannot be forgiven for slavery until reparations are made to the descendants of slaves. This belief goes back to Mosaic laws requiring anyone who caused harm to someone else to make reparations to that individual or to the family if the injured individual was dead. There certainly is precedence for reparations in America. Many Native American tribes whose ancestors were deprived of land and resources were given sweetheart deals by our government, which now allows them to own some of the largest and most lucrative gambling casinos in the world.

Many years ago, I was asked to speak at an all-tribe graduation for a large group of Native Americans who owned a massive gambling casino complex. Elders of the tribe told me that they were hoping that I could inspire many of the unmotivated young people to attend college, which the tribe would happily pay for. Since the tribe had so much money, many of the teenagers were happy to drive around in their BMWs and party instead of taking advantage of educational opportunities that would ensure a positive future for the tribe. The reparations the tribe had received were certainly justified given the tremendous losses suffered by Native Americans at the hands of American settlers, but I’m not entirely certain that the end result benefited the tribe as it could have.

I can also understand the idea of reparations for the Japanese-American families who were unjustly interned during World War II. In that case, corrective action was taken at a time when many of the victims could actually benefit from it. In the case of slavery, however, there are neither slaves nor slave owners currently living, so it seems unfair to require people who had nothing to do with slavery to pay for it. I understand the argument that the descendants of slave owners inherited property and large sums of money accumulated through slave labor, and are thus obligated to share the proceeds with the descendants of slaves. There is some legitimacy to such an argument, but no one can really quantify the percentage of assets derived from slave labor in order to distribute them.

Furthermore, where do you draw the line for reparations in the past? If you kept going back you would soon be pre-dating the existence of the United States, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Obviously it is unfair to arbitrarily pick a date or event and say that reparations should commence from that point forward. As Proverbs 17:9 reminds us, peace is more likely when one forgets about past wrongs as opposed to reminding others of them. And if we all concentrate on building on the opportunities that exist and creating a more motivating environment to encourage individuals to achieve, the sky is the limit.

If slavery had ended and everyone had been treated as equals from that point on, it might be easier to excuse the immorality that permitted hundreds of years of slavery in America. Unfortunately, slavery was followed by a system of sharecropping that exploited labor by former slaves, so that effectively they were still slaves. Jim Crow laws also kept African-Americans in a position of servitude both economically and socially. Fatal beatings and lynchings were commonplace throughout the South even into the 1970s. So on the issue of morality with respect to treating one’s fellow man fairly, I think we deserve a failing grade. That does not mean that things have not improved substantially over the last four decades, but four decades does not erase four centuries of brutal oppression.

Even today we exploit our fellow human beings for work. Is it moral for us, for example, to take advantage of cheap labor from illegal immigrants while denying them citizenship? I’m sure you can tell from the way I phrased the question that I believe we have taken the moral low road on this issue. Some segments of our economy would virtually collapse without these undocumented workers — we all know that — yet we continue to harass and deport many individuals who are simply seeking a better life for themselves and their families. Is there a way to apply logic to this issue and arrive at an intelligent solution?

All we have to do is look to our northern neighbor, Canada. They have a guest worker program,1 which allows people to enter the country as officially recognized guest workers who pay taxes, receive benefits, and are able to come and go as they please without infringing on anyone else’s rights. They have the reassuring knowledge that they have contributed to the local economy while at the same time helping their families at home. Why is immigration such a difficult issue for us to deal with? I believe we are so tempted to play politics with this issue that both logic and morality have been thrown out of the window.





WHAT IS A JUST WAR?


What does the fact that we are so often involved in conflicts with other nations say about our morality? Since the inception of our nation, there have been very few extensive periods of peace. To approach the question another way, does an individual of high moral standing frequently find himself fighting with others? By bringing it down to an individual level, it is easier to see that the number of conflicts does not predict the level of morality. Instead, we need to first look at the reasons for the various wars before commenting on their morality.

Most of our numerous conflicts could be justified based on our national interests, and even though there were always protesters to our wars, few conflicts were considered immoral until the Vietnam War came along. Many said that stopping communism’s spread was a noble goal and fully justified our involvement in this war, but others argued with some validity that we had no right to assume that our way of governing was superior to communism. As a student at Yale, I can remember these boisterous protests against the war, which echoed on college campuses across the nation.

During that war in the jungles of Vietnam, we burned villages with napalm and destroyed the lives of many innocent villagers who had nothing to do with the political struggle. The Vietcong forces had the tremendous advantage of knowing both the terrain and the people, which eventually afforded them victory in the war. Even though we had overwhelming force, we had no way to deploy it in jungle terrain. Many of our soldiers were not clear about their overall mission, which surely had a negative effect on their enthusiasm. If communist forces had been trying to invade the United States, there would have been no question about the goals of the military and the country at large, and no sacrifice would have been too great in order to achieve victory. There also would have been no question about the morality of defending our way of life in our own country. Since the Vietnam conflict ended poorly, our nation experienced a period of shame and humiliation for which the military was blamed, and many of the returning veterans were treated with disrespect. The Vietnam War2 dampened America’s enthusiasm for war, and we experienced one of the longest periods of peace in our nation’s history.

However, sixteen years after the Vietnam War ended, Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait and the enthusiasm for military intervention was tremendous. After the successful conclusion of the effort to restore freedom to Kuwait, President George H. W. Bush and the military heroes enjoyed enormous popularity and approval. A war with well-defined and widely accepted goals that ends in victory will virtually always be seen as virtuous. The subsequent war with Iraq3 years later was much more controversial, especially after weapons of mass destruction were not found. Although a qualified victory was eventually scored, the opposition to it certainly rivaled that present during the Vietnam War. Whether the war in Iraq was moral or not is highly debatable. If you think stopping a brutal dictator from continuing to kill hundreds of thousands of his own people is worthwhile, then you are more likely to believe that we acted in a morally justifiable manner. If you are more concerned about the over 4,000 American lives that were lost and the hundreds of billions of dollars that were added to our national debt to be passed along to our children, then you’re more likely to feel that our efforts were immoral.

The point here is that it is very difficult to determine our nation’s morality based on its military conflicts. Also, because we have dramatic changes of leadership and political philosophy, we do not have a consistent policy that governs military intervention. Then too one can legitimately ask the question, is any war moral? We try to sanitize wars by establishing all kinds of rules of conduct. Certainly women and children should be spared and torture should not be used, along with a myriad of other guidelines. If we followed this line of reasoning regarding prohibitions in war to its logical conclusion, I think the ultimate rule would say no war, period! If you can establish arbitrary rules for war, then making one more rule that eliminates all war makes a lot of sense. Of course, by definition, wars tend to start when logical, reasoned diplomacy fails.





FAMILY VALUES AND EDUCATION


It is hard to talk about the morality of a nation without considering the question of family values and the education of our youth. As we discussed in chapter 4, our founding fathers placed great importance on educating future generations. “I think with you,” Benjamin Franklin once said, “that nothing is of more importance for the public weal [or welfare], than to form and train up youth in wisdom and virtue. Wise and good men are, in my opinion, the strength of the state; more so than riches or arms. I think also, that general virtue is more probably to be expected and obtained from the education of youth, than from the exhortations of adult persons; bad habits and vices of the mind being, like diseases of the body, more easily prevented than cured. I think, moreover, that the talents for the education of youth are the gift of God; and that he on whom they are bestowed, whenever a way is opened for the use of them, is as strongly called as if he heard a voice from heaven….”4

I believe one of the reasons our nation prospered was a strong emphasis on traditional family values that included instruction on the difference between right and wrong, teaching that began in the home and continued at school. And one of the central sources for defining values was the Bible, which back then was found in all public schools. Basic religious principles were taught in public schools in such a way as to have the broadest possible application without favoring any particular denomination. Children were taught that there was a Creator to whom they were responsible and that there was a moral code given to us by the Creator to whom we would all have to answer in the afterlife. The founding fathers had much to say regarding the morality of our nation and how important it was to our future, but I think one of the best quotes that summarizes their feelings is from John Adams when he said, “Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.”5

I fully recognize that many in our society would prefer not to derive their morality from the Bible and its teachings. Many such people are atheists or agnostics and claim to have their own internal moral compass. While their opinions diverge when it comes to sex outside of marriage, homosexuality, gambling, the use of illicit drugs and alcohol, and other social behavior, I find it interesting to note, however, that their moral compass points in very much the same direction as Judeo-Christian values when it comes to such issues as murder, lying, cheating, and theft.

There is no question that the perspective over the last few decades regarding social morality has changed dramatically. When I was a child, it was generally considered shameful to have a child out of wedlock, whereas today, in many segments of our society, having a child out of wedlock is the norm, not in any way assigned social stigma. Many people feel this indicates that we are progressing to a more enlightened stage and that we are less judgmental and more accepting of everyone. Although being open-minded and accepting is generally a good thing, we should examine the effect this change in attitude has on society as a whole.

Children born out of wedlock are at least twice as likely to live in poverty as those born to a traditional family consisting of a married father and mother with a stable household income.6 Unwed mothers are also more likely to be high school or college dropouts and are more likely to be recipients of public welfare — frequently on a chronic basis. There is a greater incidence of sexually transmitted diseases in both unwed mothers and unwed fathers. Not only are these things deleterious to the affected children and parents, but they also place extra burdens on the rest of society, who has to pay the bills. And because someone else pays the bill, the behavior continues, and we feed an entitlement society with a voracious appetite for government funding.

This brings us back to our point that what appears to be good in the short run, but is harmful in the long run, is in the end not virtuous and does not contribute to societal morality. A truly moral nation enacts policies that encourage personal responsibility and discourage self-destructive behavior by not subsidizing people who live irresponsibly and make poor choices. This can be done in a compassionate way by phasing out government assistance for those already receiving it and by making it clear that there will be no government assistance in the future in these situations. This is not to say that the affected individuals cannot be aided by their families, churches, and other charitable organizations and individuals. What we have just discussed may seem a bit harsh to many bleeding heart do-gooders, but I submit that what is harsh is continuing to encourage irresponsible behavior and generating a permanent underclass. We also simply cannot afford welfare programs for able-bodied people who make unwise choices and expect other people to pay for it.

An example of how responsible government policies can change a society’s behavior is found in Sweden, where they decided in the 1990s that their nation’s incidence of drunk driving was too high.7 They changed the legally tolerated blood-alcohol limit from 0.05 to 0.02 (in the United States, the average tolerated blood-alcohol level is 0.08 — four times higher than that in Sweden) and enacted and enforced severe penalties for drunk driving, including mandatory jail time, astronomical fines, and confiscation of one’s vehicle. As a result, there was a dramatic decline in alcohol-related traffic accidents and fatalities. The behavioral changes are so enculturated that hardly anyone even considers driving if they have consumed a single can of beer. This shows that people do respond to appropriate legislative changes and that there is still great potential for our nation to use government in a responsible and uplifting manner that will not break the bank and that will encourage the development of responsible citizens who will be contributors rather than dependents.





FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY: A HALLMARK

OF A MORAL GOVERNMENT


In 2008, we saw the beginning of a gigantic financial crisis on Wall Street, with financial experts convincing both Republicans and Democrats that a financial tsunami would destroy the United States and the rest of the world if a gigantic government bailout did not occur immediately. So our government embarked upon a series of financial ventures to prop up companies and financial entities that were “too big to fail.”

Whether it really worked or not is anybody’s guess and can never be proven one way or another, but one thing that did become clear was that there were many people involved in the financial markets who made enormous sums of money by engaging in questionable financial practices, while shareholders and constituents made little or nothing — or even lost great sums of money. Some of the tricks employed by money managers had been outlawed through wise legislative reforms enacted after the stock market crash in 1929 and the ensuing decade of turmoil. Congress recognized way back then that unless financial markets were regulated, greed would raise its ugly head and wreak havoc whenever human beings are involved.

During the 1990s, however, Congress allowed significant deregulation of financial markets, perhaps expecting that human nature had changed. It took almost twenty years to prove that greed was still alive and well, and it almost destroyed our nation. The obvious question given our subject matter is, does a moral nation allow criminals who have defrauded the populace to get away without penalty?

I have no problem with people making large sums of money legitimately along with all the other people involved in whatever venture is generating the money. On the other hand, just because people control our markets’ financial instruments, they should not be able to personally benefit by manipulating those instruments to their advantage. Many of these people suffer from the same type of entitlement mentality seen in poor people who are always looking for a government handout. These Wall Street moguls and corporate executives actually think that what they do is worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year, even though in many cases they are simply moving money around, producing nothing. The jury is still out on whether our government will conduct a serious investigation into what manipulation, if any, lay behind this crisis and whether justice will be served.

The Bible says that “the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil” (1 Timothy 6:10), and with this basic principle in mind one can easily see how a government that is in love with the people’s money could engage in the evil act of “bleeding the people.” A truly virtuous government would act fiscally responsible, constantly remind itself of its duties, and collect just enough money through taxes to take care of those duties. It would never overspend its budget unless there was an emergency, in which case it would make every effort to pay back the debt as soon as possible. The United States government was very fiscally responsible up until World War II, after which time paying back the national debt became less of a priority. That debt has continued to grow and now is almost equal to our gross domestic product (GDP)8 — an entire year’s worth of our nation’s production simply going to pay off debt.

There are many politicians who say we have always lived with a large national debt9 and that it is really just a number that doesn’t mean anything, but the founders of our nation would be astonished — even outraged — to hear our leaders saying such things. Thomas Jefferson said, “We shall all consider ourselves unauthorized to saddle posterity with our debts, and morally bound to pay them ourselves; and consequently within what may be deemed the period of a generation, or the life of the majority.”10

One of the greatest responsibilities of parents is that of looking out for the future of their children. This is not only a duty, it is a moral obligation. The same is true of a nation and its progeny. To saddle the next generation with unimaginable debt is not only callous, it is morally reprehensible. How can we even live with ourselves knowing that we are eroding the standard of living of the next generations with each dollar that we add to the national debt?

As of this writing, a vigorous debate has taken place regarding the budget for the remainder of the fiscal year. The Republicans, driven by the new members of the Tea Party, wanted to cut $61 billion from the budget, while the Democrats were willing to cut only about one-sixth of that amount. The president, not wanting to be accused of cutting entitlements, took a “wait and see” attitude rather than leading the charge toward fiscal responsibility. Subsequently, after a huge tug-of-war between the White House, the Republicans, and the Democrats, a new bipartisan super committee has been established to make over a trillion dollars in budgeting cuts and stem the rise of our national debt. Perhaps they will be taken more seriously than was the Bowles/Simpson Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. Both Democrats and Republicans have strayed so far from the path of responsible financial policy that the concept of balancing the budget is foreign to them. I believe many of them simply cannot grasp the concept of only spending what you have. I do understand that making budgetary cuts will be painful, but it will not be nearly as painful as going bankrupt! One need only look at historic images of Hungarian pengo bills being swept in the gutter in 1946 or of the Zimbabwe one hundred trillion dollar bill created recently because of their rocketing hyperinflation11 to understand the gravity of this situation.

Knowing how Washington works, I can already predict that our Democratic president and the rest of the Democratic Party will claim that the Republicans want to cut programs that benefit children, the elderly, and the infirm and that they want to stifle medical research and programs that will create economic growth. The Republicans will claim that the Democrats are addicted to spending and couldn’t stop if their lives depended on it. Applying logic to the situation, which may be too much to hope for given all the emotions flying around Washington, could go a long way toward resolving the problem without making it into a political football.

I believe the logical approach would be to have each governmental agency and department trim its budget by 10 percent — with no exceptions. In each subsequent year, another 10 percent decrease would be required and would continue as long as necessary to bring the budget back into balance. This would mean there would be no sacred cows and no sparing of entitlements. No politician, agency, or special interest group could cry foul. Government agencies would either have to become much more efficient, cut benefits, or both, and those in charge of each governmental department should have the best idea of where the excess fat is and how to cut it in the least painful manner. Since the axe would fall equally on everyone, no one could claim that they were being unfairly targeted, and we could eliminate the political overtones and get down to business.

It is often easier to understand the insight logic brings to a situation by choosing a smaller and simpler problem to solve. If a family of seven — consisting of a father, mother, and five children — experienced a substantial financial setback, many lifestyle changes would have to take place. One of the changes might be the weekly allowance. I think all of the children would understand if their parents announced that due to budgetary constraints, instead of getting ten dollars a week, they would only receive nine dollars a week — and that if things did not change, further reductions of allowance might occur in the future. Although none of the children would be happy about this change, they would be satisfied that everyone had shared equally in the sacrifice. On the other hand, if the parents decided that two of the children really were too important to have to suffer a reduction in allowance, the other three siblings would protest that they were being treated unfairly, and fights might break out.

There are a whole host of other issues we could discuss and problems we could solve by applying logic and fairness — and discuss and solve them we must, for our solutions to today’s problems have significant ramifications for tomorrow. Our problems are not ours alone — we share them with future generations — and we have a moral obligation to hand our nation over to our children and grandchildren in good shape.

If this task sounds impossible, I assure you that we can easily accomplish it if we are willing to embrace our United States Constitution and the principles put forth by the founders, who took their bearings from the Word of God. Short-term politically expedient “fixes” and morality are frequently incompatible, and moral values will only become a part of all our policies when we are willing to rediscover and embrace the principles that established our Constitution.

Morality, of course, must be based on something, and we in America have the luxury of freely deciding what that is. Although our founders felt quite comfortable with the Bible as their guidepost, we must now decide what constitutes the foundation of our morality today. Without a moral basis for the way we conduct ourselves, our values will continue to deteriorate, and with them our country’s prosperity. We have made mistakes; however, there is always time to learn from them, change our direction, and move toward a better way.





— CHAPTER 8 —





LEARNING FROM

OUR MISTAKES


EVERY PERSON MAKES MISTAKES, so it should come as no surprise that every nation of the world has made mistakes as well. Talk with a German national about the hope their country placed in Hitler’s rise to power on the heels of the Great Depression. Or consider our own nation’s internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II, and you’ll agree that the question is not whether a nation makes mistakes; the question is whether a nation learns from its mistakes, builds on that knowledge it gains over time, and grows in wisdom. Those nations who learn from their mistakes will become wise, while those who repeat the same mistakes over and over again, expecting a different result, are foolish.

I certainly experienced my share of mistakes growing up. Because of the racial and socioeconomic injustice I experienced as a boy, in my anger and frustration I began to retaliate by going after people with baseball bats, rocks, and knives. One day a boy pushed me too far. I told him to back off, but he wouldn’t quit pestering me. Finally, I pulled out my knife and lunged at him, striking him in the abdomen. He fell back, and for a moment I thought I had killed him, but just then my knife blade fell to the ground. It had hit his belt buckle and snapped in two.

I ran into the bathroom and locked myself in, terrified that I had just tried to kill someone — and over something so trivial. If his belt buckle had not been there, I would have seriously injured or killed him, and I would have been on my way to reform school or jail, following the path of so many around me.

All of my life I had attended church services, and I knew — at least in theory — that God could radically change a person’s life for the better. I also knew that I had tried to gain control of my temper time after time with repeated failure. Although I was only fourteen years old, I was familiar with behavioral modification therapy from reading Psychology Today — but I was also acutely aware that we had no money for behavioral modification therapy. By that time I was a straight-A student, yet I recognized that I would never achieve my dreams of becoming a physician as long as I harbored an uncontrollable temper.

So I fell to my knees there on the bathroom floor, pleading with God to remove my temper. There was a Bible in the bathroom, and I opened it to the book of Proverbs. Verses about anger and the folly of a fool’s actions all seemed written to me and about me. Other verses encouraged me, such as Proverbs 16:32, which says that mightier is the man who can control his temper than the man who can conquer a city. I stayed in that bathroom for three hours, reading, contemplating, and praying. My selfishness had made me so angry inside, and it dawned on me that if I could just step outside myself and look at things from someone else’s point of view, I might see the world differently and not feel so persecuted.

My new, God-given perspective worked like a charm. He became very real to me that day, and I have never had another angry outburst of uncontrollable temper since then. There would be other tests, of course, and I would make my share of mistakes. But that, after all, is how we learn and grow.

My high school, Southwestern High School in Detroit, was not particularly well known for its academics, but it was a football and basketball powerhouse. It won several state basketball championships, and you reached the pinnacle of respect among your peers if you were a starter on one of the varsity sports teams. The only other way to gain recognition was to join a successful singing group. Since we were located in Motown,1 students always expected one of the groups to make it big.

I was definitely not one of the cool guys, however. They always wore the latest fashions, knew the latest “jams” on the radio, sported a nice car, and had three “chicks” on each arm. They also had a distinctive walk known as “the Detroit strut” and an ever-changing lingo that denoted how “hip” they were.

I, on the other hand, was a total nerd, complete with stacks of books, thick glasses, a slide rule, and clean but dated clothing. I had neither a car nor a girlfriend. Nevertheless, I was certain I would make my mark in the world, because I was going to be so smart that everyone was going to have to take notice of me. But all I really got during my freshman year was ridicule, and I began to feel very out of place. By the time my sophomore year rolled around, I was ready to abandon my nerdy appearance and become one of the cool guys. I began to play basketball late into the night, and more disturbingly, I began grumbling constantly to my mother about my “uncool” clothing. My mother was very disappointed that I had lost my way and was heading in the same direction as all the people she characterized as losers. Despite her arguments, I complained incessantly.

One day, during one of our arguments, she thrust at me all the money she had made scrubbing floors and cleaning toilets and said in frustration, “You pay the bills, you buy the food, you pay the rent and take care of all the other necessities. With all the money you have left over, feel free to buy all the cool clothes you want.”

I was thrilled, because I figured I was finally going to have my way and become one of the cool guys. As I started allocating money for all the expenses, however, I quickly ran out. I soon realized that my mother was a financial genius to somehow keep us fed and sheltered. I felt like a total fool and sheepishly returned the money to her. I never complained about my clothing again.

Fortunately, having read the Bible over the preceding years, I quickly recognized that my desire to be part of the “in crowd” was more characteristic of a fool than a person of accomplishment. During my slide into foolishness, my grades had slipped precipitously, and I was horrified as I looked in the mirror and realized what I was becoming. I immediately corrected my course, abandoning any desire to be one of the cool guys. I once again became a diligent student, and my grades dramatically improved. From that day forward I was never again tempted to abandon my long-term goals for the sake of momentary acceptance.

The excitement I had experienced as a freshman in high school was nothing compared to the exhilaration I felt at becoming a “Yale man.” Going from inner-city Detroit to the ivy-covered walls of Yale was certainly a culture shock; rich wood paneling covered the dining hall walls, the plates were real china, and the eating utensils were real silver. Works of art adorned the walls, and Oriental rugs covered the hardwood floors. I had gone from dire poverty to the lap of luxury overnight — and I intended to enjoy every minute of it.

Obtaining top grades in high school had been a snap. The material was so easy I could study for half an hour before an exam and still get an A. I naturally assumed I could do the same thing at Yale, so I took judo classes, played ping-pong and table soccer, watched television, attended live entertainment events, and generally had fun. I thought I had corrected my academic flaws in high school, but academic success in a high-powered university obviously required significantly more correction than I had accomplished. By midterm, I began to worry a bit because I wasn’t doing well in some classes, including freshman chemistry, which was a prerequisite for those planning to go to medical school. My concern wasn’t enough to stop me from having fun, but it did dampen my enthusiasm.

By the time final exams rolled around, however, my grade in chemistry was so low I would have failed the course even if I had gotten an A on the final exam. In an act of great compassion (or sadism, I’m not sure which), the chemistry professor offered to give anyone who was failing the course double credit for the final exam — which gave me one last glimmer of hope. I suspect he believed that people like me had no chance of passing the final exam if they had done so poorly throughout the course of the semester; therefore, there was little or no risk in making such an offer.

The night before the final exam I sat in my room with my thick chemistry textbook, a barrier to all my hopes and dreams. I poured out my heart to God, asking forgiveness for squandering such a wonderful educational opportunity. I asked him to show me what he really wanted me to do with my life, since I obviously wasn’t going to get into medical school. Preferably, I asked him to work a miracle. As I tried futilely to memorize my entire chemistry textbook, I fell asleep and entered a dream.

During that dream I was the only student in a large auditorium, and a nebulous figure was writing out chemistry problems on the chalkboard. I awakened early that morning with the dream so vivid in my mind that I quickly consulted my chemistry textbook to corroborate what I had seen in the dream. When I opened the test booklet the next day during the chemistry final exam, I was flabbergasted when I recognized each of the problems in the booklet as one of the problems that the nebulous figure was working out on the chalkboard in my dream. It felt like I was in the twilight zone as I hurriedly scribbled down the answers, afraid that I would forget them if I waited too long.

I knew the moment I finished the exam that God had granted me my miracle. I promised God that he would never have to do such a thing for me again and that I would become a diligent student and make him proud of me. It was a scary lesson to learn, but it profoundly changed my attitude about my purpose in college.

The rest of my time at Yale was relatively smooth sailing, but medical school was another matter. The amount of new material that must be mastered in medical school is equivalent to learning several foreign languages simultaneously, and many students flunked out before the first year was over. I had learned my lesson in college and was very diligent about studying and attending all my lectures, but I still did horribly on the first set of comprehensive examinations. As a result, I was required to see my counselor who had been assigned by the university to help me get through medical school. He told me that I should simply drop out of medical school since I obviously wasn’t cut out for medicine. Of course I was crushed, because the only career I had aspired to since I was eight years old was that of a physician.

Following that meeting, I returned to my apartment and again poured out my heart to God, begging for wisdom. As I prayed, a thought occurred to me. What kind of courses have you always struggled with, I asked myself, and what kind of courses have given you no difficulty? It dawned on me that I did very well in courses that required a lot of reading, and I struggled in courses in which the material was communicated through boring lectures. Unfortunately, I was being subjected to six to eight hours of boring lectures every day in medical school. Right there and then, I made an executive decision to skip the boring lectures and to spend that time reading. It was a risky move, but if it didn’t yield results, I would have been in no worse shape than I was in already. It turned out to be a fabulously successful strategy, and the rest of medical school was a snap.

That traumatic episode taught me how important it was to learn your own strengths and weaknesses from your mistakes. Over the subsequent years, I have saved enormous time and effort by understanding that I gain nothing from listening to boring lectures. I did learn that I respond well to visual input, such as reading books, viewing images, and using flashcards. I’m convinced that much of the success I have experienced in life is a result of learning from my failures.





LESSONS FROM OUR MISTAKE

OF ALLOWING SLAVERY


Of all the mistakes our nation has engaged in, allowing the practice of slavery was obviously one of our most egregious. I have found that when I extol the virtues of our nation, particularly on college campuses, the question of slavery frequently comes up — and this, of course, casts a huge shadow on many of the outstanding accomplishments of our leaders over the course of our nation’s history. I doubt that there are many people today who would try to justify slavery, and it’s safe to say there is general agreement that it was an abomination. But what did we learn from this mistake?

I hope we learned that all men are indeed created equal, and that given proper opportunities, not only can they improve their personal lot in life, but through the development of their intellect they can make substantial contributions to society at large. In the case of African-Americans, all you have to do is open your eyes to see the many contributions they have made to the welfare of our nation.

When you see a light, for instance, you may think of Thomas Edison, but it was his right-hand man, Louis Latimer, an African-American, who developed the filament for the lightbulb, allowing it to function for more than two or three days. He also invented the electric lamp, did pioneering work in incandescent lighting, and diagrammed the telephone for Alexander Graham Bell, among other things. The traffic signal was invented by Garrett Morgan, an African-American who also invented the gas mask, which saved many lives during wars. From the potato chip to the ironing board, from refrigeration systems to sound equipment such as the microphone chip, many items that we use on a regular basis were invented by African-American individuals,2 who were once relegated simply to the role of slave.

If we as a nation learn the inherent value of every citizen, our policies will strive to cultivate that talent to benefit us all. The fact that we have not recognized a high school dropout rate of 30 percent as a national disaster shows that we have yet to fully comprehend the value of each individual. Not only are we failing to reap substantial benefits from these individuals, but in many cases we are actually depleting our coffers by paying for them in the penal system or the welfare system. Any one of these young people with proper encouragement and education could potentially come up with innovative products or helpful services. But because of our history of segregation, Jim Crowism, and racism, generations of African-Americans have grown up with a sense of alienation toward their own country. This has created extreme levels of cynicism and distrust among many citizens who might otherwise have been enthusiastic supporters of the nation.

I have heard it said that everybody harbors some degree of racism, but my own observations have led me to believe that individuals who are well-educated and who think deeply about matters tend to not base any biases on superficial characteristics. Such people tend to realize that it is the brain that makes the person who they are, not the external covering. People who are less intellectually sophisticated tend to allow their emotions to be affected by very superficial things, such as skin color. Unfortunately, basing one’s ideas and opinions on superficial traits is rather common in places where intellectual development is not highly rewarded or praised. I suspect that if one did an in-depth study of people who arbitrarily engage in racial bias, they would find that such people were also attracted to visually appealing but unhealthy foods. They might be more inclined to go for the flashy red car than the dull gray hybrid that gets fifty miles to a gallon of gasoline. These people come in all sizes, colors, shapes, and socioeconomic categories, and rather than shun and castigate such people, our nation’s goal should be to educate them and fill in the intellectual gaps, which would improve their value both to themselves and to us all.

As an intern at Johns Hopkins in 1977, I was frequently mistaken for an orderly, phlebotomist, respiratory therapist, or some position other than a doctor. For most, it was an innocent mistake; however, it would have been easy for them to notice that I had a stethoscope around my neck. Or that I was in scrubs, or was wearing a white lab coat, which would have been extremely unusual for an orderly. When I would gently point out that I was a doctor, the majority of people were highly embarrassed and apologetic. I tried to alleviate their discomfort by letting them know that I was in no way offended and that I could easily have made a similar mistake. I never encountered anyone who made that same mistake twice. I helped eliminate their social ignorance, which I’m sure was beneficial to them in the long run.





STILL SHAKING SHALLOW, RACIST THINKING


Although much overt racism has been eliminated in America, there are still too many people who make sweeping generalizations about whole groups of people based on a negative encounter with a person of a different race. In order to resolve this problem, we must first admit that it exists even in our own families or ourselves — and African-Americans are just as likely to harbor racist attitudes as white people.

Just prior to the last presidential election, when the first African-American was elected president of the United States, I saw on television a segment where a reporter was interviewing African-Americans in Harlem, New York, about various policies advocated by candidate Barack Obama. All of the interviewees enthusiastically supported each policy discussed without knowing that they were actually the policies held by candidate John McCain. The most hilarious part of the interviews occurred when the people were asked what they thought about Senator Obama’s choice of his running mate, Sarah Palin. The answers were all quite favorable toward Governor Palin because she was picked, they thought, by Obama. Many African-Americans voted for Obama simply because he was a black man and not because they resonated philosophically with his policies. If the situation were reversed, and white people were obviously voting for their candidate based on race and not political philosophy, shouts of racism would be deafening.

I do, however, understand the enormous pride African-Americans have because the president of the United States is a black man. I even know staunchly conservative African-Americans who voted for Obama even though they vehemently opposed his political platform. One individual told me that it wasn’t really racism, but rather just a matter of being overwhelmed by emotion upon entering the voting booth. But racism is a subset of hatred, which also is an emotion. I’m sure many white voters were overwhelmed by emotion several years ago during California’s 1982 race for governor, when they couldn’t bring themselves to vote for Tom Bradley, who was the mayor of Los Angeles at the time and happened to be an African-American. All the pre-election polls showed Bradley far ahead of his white opponent, and it was a foregone conclusion that he was going to win and become California’s first African-American governor — but when it came time to cast votes, sentiment swung radically in the other direction. Voting for Barack Obama simply because he is black is just as irrational and racist as not voting for Tom Bradley because he was black.

As a nation, we must first admit that we have a problem with racism and shallow thinking, and we need to redouble our efforts to learn from the ugly episodes in our history and move forward — united — to tackle real problems.





COMPOUNDING OUR MISTAKES FINANCIALLY


Because President Obama is an African-American who believes in redistributing wealth, white people might wonder if all or most black people are like President Obama and want to redistribute wealth. However, I personally know many African-Americans who vigorously disagree with the concept of government redistribution of wealth. They love this country and have put forth a great deal of physical and intellectual effort to succeed in our nation. They share the same values as the majority of Americans and believe that they should be able to keep or distribute their resources as they see fit.

When the government becomes large and intrusive and feels that it has the right to as much of the resources owned by the people as it wants, then we have clearly strayed away from some of the foundational principles of this nation. What is truly amazing is how accepting most Americans are of this government intrusion into our lives and bank accounts. It is commonplace today to find large groups of people who believe the government has a responsibility to take care of all the basic necessities of its citizens. Benjamin Franklin, however, wrote:

To relieve the misfortunes of our fellow creatures is concurring with the Deity; it is godlike; but, if we provide encouragement for laziness, and supports for folly, may we not be found fighting against the order of God and nature, which perhaps has appointed want and misery as the proper punishments for, and cautions against, as well as necessary consequences of, idleness and extravagance? Whenever we attempt to amend the scheme of Providence, and to interfere with the government of the world, we had need be very circumspect, lest we do more harm than good.3



In this passage and in many of his other writings, Franklin makes it clear that kindness and charity are admirable traits, but that it is actually destructive to continually support the needs and habits of those who are lazy and irresponsible. By doing so, we only encourage the proliferation of these undesirable traits and the numbers of people who have to be supported. Samuel Adams went right to the heart of the matter when he said, “The utopian schemes of leveling (redistribution), and a community of goods (the government owns everything), are as visionary and impractical as those which vest all property in the Crown.”4 These ideas he even called unconstitutional.

I believe we are in the process right now of learning that our government is far too big — and the bigger it gets, the more taxpayer money it needs to sustain itself. A gigantic, bloated government has to keep itself busy in order to justify its existence; hence, you have more regulations and meddling in the affairs of the people, whether they request it, need it, or not. Our government is now so large and expensive that each year our national debt grows larger. Currently it sits between $14 and $15 trillion — a number that is so large that it is virtually incomprehensible. That comes out to $50,000 for every man, woman, and child in the United States.

It was obviously a mistake to allow our government to reach this size and to spend as much as it has, but it is not the fault of one party or the other. Rather, it is the natural tendency of government to expand if there is no conscientious effort to keep it under control. The Constitution of the United States was written in such a way as to restrain government growth and power if there was the will to adhere to it, but unfortunately many of our legislators feel that the Constitution is outdated and largely irrelevant to today’s society. They feel that we have advanced far beyond the understanding of the founding fathers and that through appropriate government, we can create a better life for everyone. They may be right, but I doubt it. The reason I’m skeptical that we need a new government is that the old government worked so well. Our early, limited government provided an atmosphere that encouraged productivity and innovation, resulting in the most rapid expansion of a powerful middle class that the world had ever seen. It resulted in enormous economic and industrial power as well as an extremely educated populace. If you have something that works, why change it?

Is there a logical solution for controlling the size of our government and the resulting size of our national deficit? Currently the debate is raging in Washington between the Republicans, who have been largely co-opted by the Tea Party, and the Democrats, who are finding it very difficult to break out of their tax-and-spend mode. The Democrats accuse Republicans of draconian budget cuts that would take food out of the mouths of babies and shelter from the elderly. At the same time, the Republicans accuse the Democrats of having no concern for our future generations and no understanding of the concept of budgetary constraints. Who is right and who is wrong in this exaggerated tug-of-war is not nearly as important as how to solve the problem. The problem is our mistake of permitting a bloated government bureaucracy that requires unimaginable amounts of money to sustain itself. And our problem is magnified by numerous special interest groups advocating to protect their pet programs from a reduction in government spending.

As a nation, we have become so accustomed to ever-rising taxes that the fact that the government takes up to half of all one’s income does not really faze many people anymore. Our government would do well to remember that one of the major reasons for the Revolutionary War was excessive taxation. I will admit to making a very good living, and I am grateful to live in this country and to have been afforded the opportunity to obtain a first-rate education and pursue the career of my choosing. However, my biggest expense by far is taxes. Between federal, state, local, sales, and real estate taxes, more than half of my income goes to pay taxes. Since that is the case, you might say that I work for the government. This is certainly not the kind of situation that was envisioned by the founding fathers.





THE FOUNDING FATHERS ON FINANCIAL

RESPONSIBILITY


It is clear from the writings of our founding fathers that they disagreed with such excessive taxation to redistribute wealth. In the Annals of Congress (House of Representatives, 3rd Congress, 1794), President James Madison is documented as saying, “I cannot undertake to lay my finger on that article of the Constitution which granted a right to Congress of expending, on objects of benevolence, the money of their constituents.”

We all want to be benevolent, of course, but as President Madison pointed out, there is nothing in the Constitution that entitles the government to use the money of their constituents for charitable purposes, no matter how noble their goals. His quote should be read every day to members of our current Congress, particularly to those who complain about restraining the sacred entitlements to which our population has become addicted. Again our goals should be to reinstill a sense of independence and self-reliance in all of our citizens while continuing to cultivate caring and compassion for our neighbors who cannot take care of themselves.

Thomas Jefferson, an incredible visionary, made it clear that the accumulation of huge debt by the government is not only unacceptable, but dangerous to the preservation of our nation. “I place economy among the first and most important virtues,” he said, “and public debt as the greatest of dangers. To preserve our independence, we must not let our rulers load us with perpetual debt.”5 It almost seems as if he had the ability to look into the future and recognize the natural consequences of ever-growing and unrestrained government. “The principle of spending money to be paid by future generations,” he added, “under the name of funding, is but swindling futurity on a large scale.”6 Many voices today decry the accumulation of debt we’re passing on to the next generation, but their protests are falling on many deaf ears among our leaders in government. But it is this statement of his that is especially alarming given the stated goals of the current administration to redistribute wealth: “The democracy will cease to exist when you take away from those who are willing to work and give to those who would not.”7 I hope this quote shakes you to the core, as it does me, and that you will realize how far we have strayed from the ideas of those who founded our nation and set it on a course of unparalleled success.

Jefferson was not alone in his views, and even some of his political foes embraced the ideas that are paramount to protecting our liberties and the prosperity of our nation. James Madison said, “If Congress can employ money indefinitely to the general welfare…. the powers of Congress would subvert the very foundation, the very nature of the limited government established by the people of America.”8 John Adams even appealed the matter to higher spiritual realities when he said, “The moment the idea is admitted into society that property is not as sacred as the laws of God, and that there is not a force of law and public justice to protect it, anarchy and tyranny commence.”9

Would applying logic help in solving this problem of taxation? Certainly there have been many different schemes devised by mankind throughout history to impose and collect taxes. There is, however, only one tax imposed by God and that is the tithe, which is one-tenth of your salary. Interestingly, God did not say if you have a bumper crop that you should give triple tithes, nor did he say if your crops fail, you are entitled to a reduction in tithes or need to pay no tithes at all. This means that there is fairness in proportionality; if you make $10 billion a year, your tax or tithe would be $1 billion, whereas if your income is $10 a year, you would pay $1. Some would say that the billionaire is not hurt by his $1 billion contribution as much as the poor man who had to give up a dollar. They would say that the pain is not proportional and that the government has the right to decide how much more the rich man should pay. But where in God’s law does it say that the rich man needs to give until it hurts? He just put $1 billion into the common pot, so why do we need to hurt him? It is this kind of thinking that has led to the proliferation of offshore bank accounts. If we had a proportional tax system, there would be no significant incentive for people to hide their money and they could spend more time concentrating on production, which in the long run would lead to even more money for the government. What about creating an atmosphere that encourages businesses to not hide their money, but to invest it back into the company to expand it and provide more jobs?

Our corporate tax rate is the second highest in the world. The only country with a higher corporate tax rate is Japan, which just so happens to also be the only country with a greater national debt than we have. Is that coincidence or evidence of cause and effect? I suspect the latter. By being shortsighted and greedy, our government is driving businesses to other countries, which deprives our people not only of jobs, but our government of vital income. If a low proportional tax rate is applied to everyone, including corporate entities, the flow of jobs and income would be into our nation rather than out of our nation. This is not complex economic theory, but rather common sense.





SIMPLIFY, SIMPLIFY, SIMPLIFY


In my many years as an academic physician, I have had the opportunity to hear many lectures by intellectuals from all over the world. Invariably, the best talks are not the ones that use complex terms and theories to demonstrate how brilliant the presenter is. Rather, the very best, most profound lectures are the ones that can easily be understood — even by those who are not experts in the field. I find that one has to have a very deep understanding of their subject matter in order to be able to break it down into commonsense language that anyone can comprehend and appreciate. The same is true of economists and politicians. Those with logical plans and straightforward common sense are easily understood. Meanwhile those who have no idea what they’re talking about frequently make things far more complex than they need to be, and tell the people that they would understand it if only they were more knowledgeable and sophisticated.

Our founders knew that a slick politician can easily pull the wool over the eyes of an ignorant population, so they emphasized the importance of a broad, general education among the populace in order to maintain our freedom. I also believe, however, that legitimate political leaders have an obligation to explain their positions in a way that the common people can easily understand. As a neurosurgeon, I too have an obligation to explain the rationale for a complex operation that I propose in a way that allows the patient to make an intelligent decision. Any surgeon who cannot do that should not be operating, and the same is true of those running for political office.

Undoubtedly some critics will try to discredit me by saying, “He is a brilliant surgeon, but he knows nothing about politics, law, and economics, and should confine his opinions to medicine.” As I already mentioned, however, five physicians signed the Declaration of Independence and several were signatories for the Constitution of the United States of America. In addition, physicians are the most highly educated group in the nation, trained to make decisions based on facts rather than emotion. They tend to be excellent with numbers, very concerned about the welfare of others, and accustomed to hard work. I speak at many medical school commencements and always encourage physicians to get involved in community affairs and in politics. In fact, I would love to see scientists and engineers get much more involved in the political process, bringing their no-nonsense common sense and logic to the table.

I am certainly not saying that people who are not physicians and scientists lack logical thinking skills — and it’s sad that I even have to make such a disclaimer, but in our social milieu today, people who do not have very good arguments themselves tend to dissect every word of someone with whom they disagree in an attempt to make themselves look smart while discrediting someone else. Such tactics can be quite effective on people who do not think for themselves. This is another reason why our founding fathers placed so much emphasis on education for the common people — particularly on establishing values and understanding civics. They envisioned a government that was constantly changing its members, because by avoiding entrenchment you disempower special interest groups and ensure fresh ideas. Since working for the government as a senator, representative, or staff person back then was not lucrative and required personal sacrifice, they never suspected that the system of government they put in place would be distorted by career politicians.





WHAT VALUES WILL HELP GUIDE US AWAY

FROM FUTURE MISTAKES?


When our nation was rising rapidly to the pinnacle of the world, we were not ashamed of our relationship with God. In fact, reading from the Bible was not only common, it was expected in early public schools. The founders wanted generally accepted religious values to be taught in our schools without favoring any particular denomination, but they never intended to exclude God from the classroom,10 because they knew that you had to have something upon which to base your system of values. If we only believe in evolution and survival of the fittest, whose values do we use to govern society?

Our society has become so paranoid about being politically incorrect that many people are afraid to say “Merry Christmas” simply because it contains the word Christ. Rather than spending so much time trying to figure out how not to offend people, it would be wonderful if we expended energy on teaching people not to be offended when someone offers a different opinion. Our emphasis should not be on unanimity of speech and thought, but rather on learning to be respectful and courteous to those with different opinions. I am fond of saying that if two people think and say the same thing about everything, then one of them is not necessary. Also, if people can’t hold honest conversations and are afraid to express their true feelings, conversations will necessarily be artificial, and it will be very difficult to have a meaningful discourse and solve problems.

It is my hope and prayer that we will vigorously protect the rights of individuals and communities to live and believe as they please, as long as they do not infringe upon the rights of others. I hope we continue to protect the rights of our citizens to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, not micromanaging their lives and imposing societal standards of political correctness that impinge upon their liberty. These principles have nothing to do with liberalism or conservatism, but rather are the foundation that paved the way for the creation of the most successful and productive society the world has ever seen. We have had the opportunity to witness what works, and we have seen historically many examples of political systems that do not work.11 Hopefully we will be wise enough to step back, take a deep breath, and critically analyze the triumphs and mistakes of our nation, and to use what we have learned to take another gigantic leap forward with liberty and justice for all.





— CHAPTER 9 —





AMERICA’S ROLE IN

A WORLD AT WAR


WHEN I WAS AN UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT AT YALE, the Vietnam War was still raging. Many students, frustrated by our nation’s involvement in that war, referred to members of the military — including the National Guard — as “pigs,” and anything having to do with our national defense as part of the “military-industrial complex.” Even local police were generally regarded as part of the oppressive “establishment.” This antigovernment attitude was so pervasive on the Yale campus that ROTC cadets were not required to wear their uniforms because officials feared they might be physically attacked.

The Vietnam War was, in retrospect, not a noble conflict. It brought shame to our nation because of both the outcome and the cause, and many people continue to bash the military and want to ban ROTC (Reserve Officers’ Training Corps) from their college campuses. They believe the military is immoral and intellectually inferior. If they were a little more open-minded, however, they might realize that it takes tremendous intelligence and leadership to effectively command and control the massive global military infrastructure responsible for their freedom. Fortunately, we as a society have matured some since then, and even many of the far-left progressives commend the men and women of the military while condemning its actions. I speak at many college graduations and am proud to see the standing ovation that almost invariably occurs when graduates of the ROTC are recognized, something that never would have occurred three or four decades ago.

Except during the summer months, I am on a college campus almost on a weekly basis, and I greatly enjoy interacting with the bright young people who represent our future. Recently, I was thrilled to be invited to give a special lecture at the US Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland. The facility was immaculate and the cadets’ demeanor was one of dignity, respect, and confidence. After interacting with several of them, I was very impressed with their knowledge and ability to express themselves. I subsequently discovered how rigorous the admissions process is, and I began to understand why so many of our military leaders are historically so intellectually accomplished. Seeing that sea of dress white uniforms was awe-inspiring, and the cadets were extremely attentive and receptive as I spoke. The pageantry I have witnessed over the years at Army, Navy, and Marine reviews is no façade, but reflects the pride and competence that characterizes our military.

My fascination with the military and its relationship to governing powers, along with my desire to wear the uniform, played a major role in my joining the ROTC back in high school. My brother, Curtis, who was a couple of years ahead of me, was a captain and company commander of our school unit when I joined, and his many ribbons and medals gave him universal respect both inside and outside of the ROTC world. I already had a great love for reading before involving myself in ROTC, so I was absolutely thrilled with all the books and manuals available to cadets — books on military strategy, martial law, explosives, map reading, and a myriad of other topics. I quickly rose through the ranks because of my acquisition of knowledge and observance of military protocol and dedication.

Because Baltimore is located so close to Washington, DC, the Pentagon, several military bases, and the Department of Defense, my wife and I have had the opportunity to befriend many military families. I love to play pool (billiards) and consider myself a pretty good player, but one day we were playing in the basement of my home when General Krulak, Commandant of the Marine Corps from the mid- to late 1990s, arrived. “What is that game you guys are playing?” he asked innocently. He then proceeded to clear the table without missing a single shot. He is an extremely bright, tactical, compassionate, and practical individual. He served in various commanding positions from Counter Guerilla Warfare School in Okinawa to Combat Development Command in Quantico, and after retiring from the Marine Corps, he successfully led the European division of MBNA, the nation’s largest credit card company. He and his wife, Zandy, are great supporters of our Carson Scholars Fund and are wonderful role models for our young people. With leadership of his caliber, I am greatly comforted knowing our country is in great hands.

I first met General Colin Powell at a national conference in Detroit for which we were both keynote speakers. At that time, he was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and was already quite well known throughout the world. He was alert in noticing every detail about his environment and the people around him at every moment. His dignified but relaxed demeanor, and ability to speak competently to anyone on a wide range of subjects, inspired awe in everyone around him. I subsequently became a board member of his “America’s Promise” organization and became even more impressed with his organizational skills and vision for our nation. Many of our former presidents, including George Washington, made their initial contributions to our society through their military participation, and I believe Colin Powell could probably have become the first African-American president of the United States.

Another admirable leader I’ve had the privilege to get to know, General Clara Adams-Ender, is a nurse who became the first African-American female to command a major Army base.1 She may be short in stature, but she was a giant presiding over ceremonies at Fort Belvoir just outside of Washington, DC, a premier installation whose duties include entertaining visiting international dignitaries, such as Israeli military leader Moshe Dayan. It was thrilling to see this young woman review the troops, especially when her second-in-command was a young man appearing to be twice her height! When she retired from the military, she and her husband went on to establish their own successful business, and she continues to make her presence known. General Adams-Ender is yet another example of excellence at the helm of our military establishment.

One experience I lived through captures the clash in America regarding attitudes toward our military. In 1967, during my high school years in ROTC, the Detroit riots erupted, which were among the worst our nation has ever seen. Tanks rumbled down the street and squadrons of heavily armed soldiers stood guard on street corners to prevent looting. Some of the soldiers were even attacked and shot at. I, on the other hand, was delighted to see the military, because they were able to restore a semblance of peace and calm to the area. For those who wanted to continue looting and rioting, the soldiers stood in their way and were therefore seen as bad. For the citizens who desired restoration of law and order, the soldiers were seen as good. The former group began to characterize the latter group as racist, and for many the term law and order became synonymous with racist attitudes. This is what happens when people begin to polarize themselves based on phrases used by rabble-rousers who for the most part are only interested in their own positions. I think in the long run almost everyone was happy with the performance of the National Guard and with the return to normalcy on the streets of Detroit.

Although racial tensions were explosive in 1967, just one year later the city was a picture of harmony, not because of great political leadership, but rather because the Detroit Tigers were about to win the World Series for the first time in nearly four decades. Everyone was so caught up in the excitement, they forgot their differences and reveled in their common pride. What an incredible testimony to the power of creating common goals and desires — which is, of course, a hallmark of outstanding leadership.





THE STING OF HUMAN NATURE: WHY CAN

WE NOT PEACEFULLY COEXIST?


When I was a college student at Yale, the military draft for the Vietnam War was still in effect. People felt that favoritism played a large role in who was selected; therefore, a system was implemented in which a lottery determined who was drafted. All eligible men were assigned a number between 1 and 365, depending on the date of their birth. The lowest numbers were drafted first and the higher numbers were drafted last or not at all. My brother, Curtis, got a very low number and realistically assumed he was going to be drafted, even though he was in college at the time. He decided to at least apply for the military branch of his choice, so he enlisted in the Navy, where he trained as a nuclear atomic submarine operator. I, on the other hand, was dealt lottery number 333, which virtually assured I would not be drafted.

Although I would have readily accepted my responsibility to fight had I been drafted, I found myself wondering why in modern times we are still running around killing each other. Over the course of thousands of years, why has the human race failed to make meaningful strides toward peaceful coexistence? I think the answer is contained in the story of “The Scorpion and the Frog”:

A scorpion was trying desperately to reach the opposite bank of a river, but he could not swim. Then he saw a frog swimming leisurely along the shore. He implored the frog to give him a ride on his back to the other side of the river.

“Are you crazy?” the frog said. “Or maybe you think I’m crazy. What would keep you from stinging me, causing me to drown?”

The scorpion answered, “If I sting you while we’re in the river, and I cannot swim, I will also drown. Therefore, I have great incentive for keeping you alive.”

The frog saw the logic in the scorpion’s argument and he agreed to shuttle him across the river on his back. When they reached the deepest part of the river, the frog felt a painful sting on his back. As sensation began to leave his body and he began to sink he asked the scorpion, “Why did you sting me? Now we’re both going to die!”

“I’m sorry,” the scorpion answered, “but I couldn’t help it. You see, it’s my nature.”

Throughout history, mankind has behaved like the scorpion, and, unfortunately, we can assume that our natural, pugilistic tendencies will persist into the foreseeable future. For that reason, it is important to fortify ourselves against attack and maintain a state-of-the-art military apparatus. Many pacifists among us would strongly disagree, believing that if we are nice to everyone, that everyone will in turn be nice to us, and that peace will reign supreme throughout the world. I would love for that to be true, but in our world pragmatism generally wins out over idealism. I do, however, believe we should continue to work toward the goal of world peace. If we don’t set a target, we certainly will not hit it.

Being prepared to protect ourselves does not mean endless expansion of the military budget or insinuating ourselves into every conflict around the globe. One only need look to the history of the Roman Empire to learn significant lessons about what happens when military forces are stretched too thin. The Romans suffered many humiliating losses as a result, which affected the esprit de corps, leading to further erosion of a once fierce fighting force. Also, their need for ever-increasing funding led to burdensome taxes and trumped-up reasons to confiscate private property, particularly that belonging to the wealthy. The loss of a national vision, erosion of morality, and totally irresponsible fiscal policies led to the destruction of what was perhaps the greatest empire the world had ever known. Our nation should keep this in mind when evaluating trouble spots around the world and considering our level of involvement.

There are ways to affect outcomes of such conflicts without investing large amounts of money or engaging the military overtly. I believe it is unwise, however, for us to talk too openly about our political and military objectives because it unnecessarily constrains us and provides our opponents with early warning and the opportunity to prepare. I’m talking about things that have unwisely been criminalized or demonized that are better left undiscussed in a public forum. When dealing with corrupt and evil forces that are bent upon the destruction of our nation, we would be wise to keep them in the dark regarding our intentions and capabilities. For quite some time now, it seems we’ve lost our grasp on the simple logic in this as we pay too much attention to a vocal, well-meaning, but naïve group of people who insist on transparency in all of our policies. Others will agree with me that integrity and morality are considerably more important than transparency when engaging in military conflicts.

But, some may ask, how are the people to know there is integrity without transparency? Do I have logical, mutually agreeable solutions to satisfy both sides? No. But if the American people know our goals and philosophy, I would expect that they would agree that relating all the details also alerts our enemies. For the sake of our military strategists, soldiers, and the common good, I believe most would be willing to give up a few public details for the sake of better protection.





OUR NATION’S HISTORY FROM ISOLATION

TO GLOBAL PARTICIPATION


From the time of its inception until now, the United States has been involved in many military conflicts, but by the early 1900s, we were beginning to be wary of the consequences of war, particularly when there was no direct threat to our nation. While World War I raged, President Woodrow Wilson was determined to maintain US neutrality and allow our economic prosperity to continue. He was strongly supported by his Secretary of State, William Jennings Bryan, many other government officials, and public opinion. But on May 7, 1915, the Lusitania was torpedoed by a German U-boat off the coast of Ireland, killing almost 1,200 people, more than 10 percent of whom were Americans. People around the world expressed great outrage, but particularly in Great Britain and America. Nevertheless, despite sending a series of semi-threatening letters to Germany, President Wilson tried to maintain calm, and discouraged our entry into the war. Although the Germans moderated their U-boat attack policies, US commercial business interests eventually prevailed in advocating war on Germany. America was not prepared for war and contributed little to the effort when we entered in 1917, but by the spring of 1918, very successful recruitment efforts led to the influx of hundreds of thousands of American troops, with more than one million American troops in France by early fall of that year. The Germans, who had been in the driver’s seat before the entrance of America, could not match those numbers; therefore, they backed down, and in November of 1918 the Treaty of Versailles was signed, ending the war. Although America was a fledgling superpower in the first part of the twentieth century, it demonstrated great flexibility and cunning military prowess that altered the rest of the world’s perception of the US as an isolationist nation, changing the global power dynamics.

After World War I, spurred on by confidence and the tremendous industrial stimulus the war had provided, America enjoyed a thriving business community and unparalleled expansion of the manufacturing sector. We got heavily involved with the international business community, but had little desire to engage in international geopolitical squabbles. Once again, an isolationist mind-set began to prevail, while political tensions throughout Europe, Asia, and Africa began to mount. Our military preparedness had dwindled, even though large conflicts in Asia and Europe were beginning to take place. The Germans were determined to regain their status as a world power, and in 1936 entered into a treaty with Japan, forming the basis for the Axis powers. As the various international conflicts increased, the politically neutral United States sold military, industrial, and nutritional products to supply the war, greatly bolstering its coffers.

There was not unanimous agreement, however, that we should stay out of the war, which had pulled in virtually every world power except the United States. It appears that Franklin D. Roosevelt wanted to get involved, particularly given the friendship he had with Winston Churchill, but our nation’s isolationist faction was still too strong. However, on December 7, 1941, Pearl Harbor was attacked by the Japanese, and more than two thousand American servicemen lost their lives. Four days later, the Germans declared war on the United States, and an amazing thing occurred. A spirit of unity encompassed the entire nation, and we went from neutral to strongly committed to the Allied forces overnight.2

Prior to our entrance into World War II, many nations of the world had been falling like dominoes before the tyrannical Axis powers, but the Japanese made a strategic error when they awakened the sleeping giant of America. Ours was a nation with the ability to send its young men from the cities, suburbs, and countryside to fight around the world, while sending its young women into factories to build more airplanes, tanks, and mortars than anyone could imagine. Through our industrial might and determination, we became a nation that changed the course of history and delivered the world from brutal tyranny.

The United States and the Soviet Union emerged from World War II as the two superpowers of the world with markedly different philosophies regarding freedom, economics, and geopolitical strategies, which eventually led to the strategic standoff known as the “Cold War.” Although it is true that many nations that are free today owe their freedom to the United States, it is also true that we would most likely not have prevailed in our quest for freedom from Great Britain in the late 1700s without the help of the French and other nations.





THE FOG OF WAR


In spite of the obvious horrors of World War II for a generation around the world, there were also a number of green shoots that emerged for the United States following that war. National unity and pride was at an all-time high, and our infrastructure for production of industrial goods continued to function very well, leading to a booming post-war economy. The war even helped provide an impetus for the civil rights movement because African-American soldiers had performed so valiantly throughout the conflict. They boasted many heroic ground units as well as the famous Tuskegee Airmen, whose impressive list of successful combat missions is unparalleled. In 1948 President Truman outlawed segregation in the armed forces, paving the way for the abolition of this abominable practice throughout America.

We experienced a similar groundswell of unity after the 9/11 crisis in New York City. Political rancor ceased and almost everyone united behind President George W. Bush for a season. Whether America’s ensuing steps into war in Afghanistan and Iraq will be seen as positive or negative remains to be seen, but I can’t help thinking there may have been a better way to react that would not have cost us so many lives and financial capital. I believe that if the president had seized the moment and declared that we would become petroleum independent within the next ten years as part of our effort to strip terrorism of its resources, that business, industry, academia, and everyone else would have been foursquare behind him, and we would have been much further ahead in the fight against terrorism than we are today.

First of all, the moderate Arab states would have been terrified about losing their economic base and would most probably have turned Osama bin Laden and anyone else we wanted over on a silver platter immediately. Second, an enormous number of jobs would likely have been created in the process of switching over to a new energy source, and Wall Street would have been booming. Third, the environmentalists would have been ecstatic; and fourth, but most importantly, the terrorists would have been deprived of much-needed funding, which would have gradually strangled their efforts. Oil prices would have fallen dramatically in an attempt to soften our resolve, but good leadership would hopefully have recognized and compensated for such a ploy. The point, of course, is that in some cases clever tactics can be employed outside of military action to respond to hostile actions. A strong military, coupled with wise leadership, will go a long way toward establishing and maintaining peace in the world.

While World War I and World War II had very positive effects on the American economy, subsequent wars have had a neutral effect at best. The Iraq war should certainly have put an end to the myth that war is good for our economy. It is true that the demand for war products gave the economy a giant boost during our wars largely subsidized by other nations, but today the expense of modern warfare far outweighs any economic benefits it achieves. War is bad on all accounts and should be the very last resort for our nation.

The horrors of war are probably best illustrated by what happened in Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the end of World War II. Not only was there massive destruction of life and property, but the residual effects of radiation after the atomic blast were felt for decades. Although the dropping of atomic weapons certainly hastened the end of the war, the Axis powers were already on the run and their defeat was certain. Nevertheless, the advent of the atomic era forever changed the landscape of large-scale international conflict. One can only imagine what would have happened to the world if the Axis powers had been first to acquire atomic weapons — and one can only imagine what will happen in the future if terrorists are armed with such weapons. A grave responsibility rests with those who are in possession of weapons of mass destruction, and the entire world should endeavor to keep them from rogue nations.

I realize that some feel that the United States and other world powers with nuclear weapons have no right to declare that others cannot have them. On the surface this seems like a fair argument, but can you imagine how many deaths would occur if everyone were given a handgun? Perhaps it would be fair to give everyone a handgun, but it certainly would not be wise. Although I applaud efforts toward nuclear disarmament, I also realize that if no one had nuclear weapons and one of the madmen of the world acquired them, worldwide tyranny would quickly follow. Therefore, we must be careful in pursuing our goals of an idyllic world.

The next two wars the United States was involved in were really ideological wars. The Korean War was a proxy war, with the Korean Peninsula becoming the site of the first Cold War conflict. It was the first major intervention in the world by the newly formed United Nations, which took action when communist North Korea, backed by China and Russia, invaded South Korea, backed primarily by the United States. The conflict lasted only three years, and Korea remains a divided nation today. In the case of Vietnam, we were trying to stop the spread of communism, which seems like a noble cause to those who hate communism. However, many people love communism, and certainly everyone should have the right to live under the system of their choosing. The problem occurs when a system of government is forcibly imposed upon unwilling participants. It was our attempt to stop such intrusions that led to our participation in these wars. Although our intentions were noble, I question our methodology.

A major question, however, remains: what responsibility does the world’s only superpower have when it comes to responding to humanitarian atrocities throughout the world? Should we have intervened in Rwanda to prevent the slaughter of over one million innocent people? Should we have been more concerned about the hundreds of thousands of people Saddam Hussein was slaughtering than the possibility of him possessing weapons of mass destruction? When the United Nations was formed, it was intended to be an international guardian of freedom that would not allow humanitarian atrocities. Like the United States, however, it has become so bogged down in politics that it did virtually nothing to stop these and many other calamities from occurring. Recently, it did vindicate itself to a degree by taking relatively quick action against the ruthless regime of Moammar Gadhafi in Libya, but its overall record leaves something to be desired. These issues become very complex when a nation responds to these atrocities through the lens of such questions as, what’s in it for us? and how does it fit into our global strategic goals? They are much simpler to answer, however, when constrained by the principle of doing what’s right and moral.





FILLING THE ETHICAL VOID TODAY


A large void in ethical world leadership has been present for quite a while, and this is a perfect time for the United States to step forward and offer effective, morally consistent policies unconstrained by political correctness. If a bully faction or bully nation is beating up on those with whom it disagrees or simply doesn’t like, we should immediately stop them with brutal force, if necessary, because it is the right thing to do. If that were done consistently, I guarantee that such incidents would cease almost immediately.

I mention political correctness here because it only hampers effectiveness. For example, a lot of time, effort, and lives were wasted in Fallujah, Iraq, because the terrorists were hiding among the people and using them as shields against the American forces. Political correctness dictates that we cannot kill innocent women and children in the process of destroying the enemy. I certainly agree from a moral perspective, but from a military perspective I would not have played their game. I would have announced via bullhorn and leaflets that in seventy-two hours Fallujah was going to become part of the desert because there were substantial numbers of terrorists hiding there. This would have given people time to flee before the city was destroyed, and is a tactic that would actually save lives not only of women and children, but also men. If the terrorists were foolish enough to choose to remain and to keep people from leaving, any ensuing deaths would clearly be their responsibility. Admittedly these are very bold and definitive steps, but such actions would likely preclude long drawn-out wars, and ultimately decrease the numbers of people killed and injured.

I can just hear pacifists saying, how horrible and brutal — how could a man of God even think such a thing? But they haven’t thought beyond their initial reaction. You would not have to take this type of action very often before people began to realize that having terrorists among them was not a good thing, and they would act accordingly to either expose such individuals or expel them. On the surface, this kind of action may seem brutal, but I believe the number of innocent lives that ultimately would be spared is substantial, and it seems to me that it would be more morally acceptable to destroy structures than lives. Buildings can always be replaced, but not so for even one life. When political correctness is not introduced into warfare, efficiency and smart economic policies can prevail.

We have talked about World War I and World War II, but could World War III be in our future? The war on terror has already been declared, and unless we act with courage and decisiveness, there is no question that the terrorists will soon acquire nuclear weapons. Radical Islamic extremists are not satisfied to peacefully coexist with those they consider to be infidels. They feel that such people need to either be converted or destroyed — and there is no middle ground. Although the vast majority of Muslims don’t subscribe to this philosophy, they are not very vocal, just as the vast majority of Germans did not subscribe to Hitler’s insanity, but instead remained silent, paving the way for some of the most monstrous acts against humanity ever committed. We need to actively combat these extremists in every way possible, including economic warfare. The terrorist network derives most of its money through oil revenues, and we, along with most of the rest of the world, have an insatiable appetite for oil. Unlike the rest of the world, however, we have enormous amounts of oil under North and South Dakota, Montana, and Alaska, as well as offshore oil. I am as much of a conservationist as anyone and love the natural beauty that surrounds us, but the pragmatic part of me warns that there will be no beauty at all if the world is consumed in nuclear conflagration. As we intelligently tap our own resources, we must doggedly pursue other energy sources. With appropriate incentives, I have no question that Americans, with all their ingenuity, can come up with new sources of clean energy in a relatively short period of time.

Providing appropriate incentives to the American people should result in a plethora of ideas and inventions to solve our energy problems. Can you imagine the amount of hydroelectric power alone that is available to us, situated as we are between two oceans? We simply need to invent efficient and inexpensive ways to harness that energy. We also need a way to regulate the way some companies and individuals buy up patents of promising ideas that would threaten their sources of revenue. For instance, petroleum companies should not be allowed to purchase the patent for a new process to harness solar energy. Perhaps no one should be allowed to buy such a patent without demonstrating a clear-cut plan and the capability to bring the plan to fruition. Incorporating such ideas into our society should help America move toward energy independence, leading to greater self-sufficiency and preventing political conflicts over oil.

We have an awesome military with tremendous leadership, and we wisely have civilian oversight of the military. If our leadership is willing to once again return to the moral high ground and use our power to achieve peace and a chance for all to prosper, I believe we will have fulfilled a most noble purpose in the history of our world.





— CHAPTER 10 —





IS HEALTH CARE

A RIGHT?


MEDICINE FASCINATED ME AS A CHILD. WHENEVER A MEDICAL STORY was featured on the television or radio, I was drawn to it. Fueled by my love of books on nature, I was captivated by the life-and-death struggle of animals and insects, and I was also extremely curious when one of our older relatives died about what caused the death. I became convinced as a child of the evils of tobacco and would try to hide the cigarettes of friends and relatives who smoked. I had an insatiable desire to know how things worked, and I was constantly taking things apart (and sometimes reassembling them successfully!). The chemistry set that I received for Christmas when I was eight years old was an endless source of entertainment and learning. All of these things indicated early on that medicine would be an ideal profession for me.

I was particularly intrigued, however, by the stories presented each week in Sabbath School that featured missionary doctors who traveled to remote areas of the world at great personal sacrifice, not only to spread the gospel, but to bring physical healing and reform the health habits of the populace. What courageous compassion, I thought, for them to lay down their lives for others. Those missionary doctors seemed to me the most noble people on the face of the earth.

In fact, my first public speech, at the age of eight, involved the story of a missionary doctor. It was my turn to give the mission story in the primary division (children aged seven to nine) of our church, and when I told my mother about it, she said, “You should present it as if you were the missionary doctor talking to them.”

To do so, I practiced memorizing the story and presenting it dramatically, until I almost convinced myself that I had been there. My mother helped me create a costume the missionary might have worn, and I tried to emulate the speech of an authoritative but compassionate preacher by raising and lowering my voice at the appropriate times in my delivery.

On the morning of my presentation, the children chattered away among themselves, distracted as always, until I began reeling them in with my story. “I was quietly tiptoeing through the jungle in the dark of night without a weapon,” I confided to them in a whisper, “knowing that savage warriors had been told to bring me in dead or alive.” I fanned a fly away from my face as I pressed on through the imaginary jungle surrounding me.

“Suddenly,” I exclaimed, whirling around as I had practiced at home, “a large branch broke behind me.” To my joy and amazement, I realized everyone was drawn into the moment with me, and I had my entire audience hooked from there on.

When I finished, the teachers were so enthusiastic they asked me to give the same presentation to the adults the following week, which was unheard of. I refined my presentation over the days that followed, growing ever more nervous as the day approached about performing before a whole church auditorium full of adults. My mother told me I should simply pretend that everyone in the audience was naked — but that did nothing to alleviate my anxiety. Imagining everyone in my church naked was not a pleasant thought!

On Sabbath morning, the stage seemed larger than usual to me. Some of the adults did not look particularly happy to be there, and as I began speaking I initially took refuge behind the large white podium. But as I began to get caught up in the presentation I had practiced so many times, I ventured farther out onto the stage and began whispering and shouting and jumping to the delight of my audience, who applauded loudly when I finished. The adults were incredulous that an eight-year-old could present something so powerfully, and the seed of my public speaking career began to germinate.

After that experience, my desire to be a missionary doctor continued to grow until I was thirteen. By that time I had a much better understanding of what the life of a missionary doctor was like, and the appeal of its lifestyle had dissipated. Perhaps if I had grown up in an environment of economic privilege, I would have pursued my original goal more vigorously, but the thought of a lifetime of continued poverty was something I had a difficult time facing.

By then, however, human behavior and the lives of psychiatrists had captured my attention. The psychiatrists I saw depicted on television seemed like such wise individuals who made a real difference in the lives of desperate people — and to top it off, they drove fancy cars, lived in mansions, and had plush offices. My brother, Curtis, knew of my interest in psychiatry and bought me a subscription to Psychology Today for my fourteenth birthday. I really looked forward to receiving my magazine each month, and I became the local amateur psychologist for many of the people around me. I majored in psychology at Yale and took advanced psychiatric courses in medical school at the University of Michigan, fully believing that I was going to become a psychiatrist. However, I was so impressed whenever the neurosurgeons made presentations to our class that I began to have second thoughts about my area of specialization.

So I asked God to give me wisdom to make a proper decision that would have a lifetime of implications. I truly believe God gives everyone special gifts and talents, and as I began to assess mine, I quickly realized that the talents necessary to be a good neurosurgeon — good eye-hand coordination, steadiness, calmness, and the ability to think in three dimensions — were all things I possessed already. After realizing that, the decision for me was quite easy, and I have never regretted it. When I made that decision to become a neurosurgeon, I did briefly think about the fact that I would have a much smaller impact on the lives of people than I would have had as a missionary doctor, but I felt that God was leading me and that he clearly knew more than I did about his plans for me. As it turns out, because of the amazing career that he orchestrated for me, I have been able to touch more lives through my books, magazine articles, interviews, and a made-for-television movie than perhaps I could have as a missionary doctor. It was that very ability to positively touch lives that attracted me to medicine in the first place — and is the reason that many of our nation’s doctors, nurses, and other health-care professionals are attracted to the field as well.





PRIVATE DECISIONS, PUBLIC CONSEQUENCES?


When I was a neurosurgery resident at Johns Hopkins, on numerous occasions my wife and I would be in the car driving and suddenly a motorcyclist with no helmet on would whiz past us, seemingly without a care in the world. I had to fight feelings of anger as I thought about how often I was awakened at two in the morning to respond to a severe head trauma case from a motorcyclist who was not wearing a helmet involved in a motor vehicle accident. Yet that motorcyclist had every right to neglect his own safety, and at that time, that right was protected by law.

Subsequently, helmet laws were enacted, much to the displeasure of many motorcyclists, but to the great relief of many health-care practitioners. The ramifications of such irresponsible behavior on behalf of the motorcyclists, however, extend far beyond the inconvenience suffered by people like me who had to take care of them. Sometimes the head injuries were very severe, and saving the victims became an extremely expensive process that involved not only acute medical care, but also long-term rehabilitative services, and in some very sad cases, chronic maintenance for those with little or no chance of resuming productive lives. Although doctors sometimes resent having to give up time with their families and the many other sacrifices associated with the medical profession, few people stop to philosophize about whether the victims have a right to consume enormous amounts of medical resources. In our society, we do not discuss the behavior that created the problem, and we generally do not discuss the price of treatment or the significant impact on their family and societal resources (welfare).

Not many years ago, when I was on call, a fifteen-year-old boy was brought into our pediatric emergency room with a high fever and a decreasing level of consciousness. After a rapid and thorough workup, we discovered that he had multiple intracranial bacterial abscesses. It took several operations and extended time in the intensive care unit to get his health temporarily under control. Saving him cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, and in the end he had no insurance or other means to pay his bill. We subsequently discovered that he was in the country illegally, but that did not change the fact that he was in dire need of medical care.

We do not like to ask questions in situations such as this that force us to make judgments about who should get care and how much care they should get. It is far easier to simply render whatever treatment is necessary and let someone else worry about the bill. In America, we tend to have a very negative reaction to the health-care systems of countries such as England that are based on a socialized model. And we particularly abhor the rationing of care based on such factors as age.

For example, under some socialized systems, kidney transplants are not even considered for individuals over the age of sixty, which means that most of our United States Supreme Court justices would be too old to be considered for such a life-saving treatment in many countries with socialized medicine. Who is right? Those who feel that it is our moral obligation to treat everyone regardless of cost, or those who feel that rationing and other means of cost containment make more sense to our nation’s health-care funding in the long run. As with virtually all controversial issues, the answer usually lies somewhere in between, and compromise can be very helpful. I must admit that in my many years of medicine, I have never witnessed a patient abandoned because of lack of money. In America we suffer much more from a lack of money than we do from a lack of compassion.





THERE’S NO SUCH THING AS A

FREE LUNCH HEALTH-CARE POLICY


One of the by-products of our society’s strong value on compassion is the development of an entitlement mentality among large portions of our populace. I have noticed at Johns Hopkins Hospital that many of the indigent patients — instead of feeling grateful for the fact that people are willing to extend to them sophisticated and expensive care with little or no remuneration — are the most belligerent and the most likely to initiate lawsuits. By no stretch of the imagination are all indigent patients like this — and I shouldn’t even have to make such a disclaimer — but there exists in our society today a vocal and highly sensitive minority who are constantly monitoring every word to try to find fault with the finer points, rather than examining the overall message and attempting to engage in constructive dialogue to help find solutions. The fact that some of these patients become abusive and threatening does nothing to improve their care and actually is destructive to the development of the kinds of relationships with nurses, doctors, and other health-care providers that ensure quality care. No one likes to be around those always looking to pick a fight, which means that a belligerent person or their child might not be checked on and chatted with as frequently as someone who is reasonable and pleasant to be around. That, of course, means something might be missed, which continues to exacerbate the doctor-patient relationship.

Contrary to popular belief, one of the reasons many physicians refuse to see indigent patients is not that they cannot pay, but because of the poor treatment they receive from such patients. This cycle can then lead to degenerating doctor-patient relationships and a higher frequency of lawsuits. Care of the indigent has always been a big part of medicine in America, as it should be, but it should be seen as charitable work as opposed to mandatory labor. As a society, we could even explore certain incentives for health-care workers to engage in even more charitable work.

Our first child, Murray, was born in Australia, and though he has dual citizenship with the United States, he was officially an Aussie first. The health-care system in Australia provides substantial benefits for its citizens, and when a baby is born, the family receives a “baby bonus,” which provides substantial income throughout childhood. There was also a “milk allowance” and free nursing care centers for babies. Basic medical care was provided for all citizens at no cost, but everyone had the right to purchase private health insurance, which enabled subscribers to enjoy more personalized services and less waiting time. Although it was a two-tiered system, I did not witness much resentment by those receiving their basic care free of charge against those who could afford private insurance. There may be some substantial lessons that we can learn from such a system.

For instance, everyone has different needs and we do not have to have a cookie-cutter, one-size-fits-all system. Because one person drives a Chevrolet and another drives a Mercedes, it doesn’t automatically mean that the Chevrolet driver is deprived or needs some supplement. The fact is, he can get to the same places as a Mercedes driver with perhaps slightly less comfort. People have different medical needs and some can afford the Chevrolet plan while others can afford the Mercedes plan. We should leave it at that and not try to micromanage people’s lives as long as the care is adequate.

Not long ago, as I was writing in a patient’s chart at the Johns Hopkins Children’s Center, I overheard two female housekeeping staff members complaining about the fact that they had to shell out five to ten dollars as a co-pay every time they saw their doctor. It was grossly unjust, they felt, for anyone to expect them to use their meager salaries to contribute to paying their health-care costs. I started to ask them whether they thought medical care should be completely free — and who should be responsible to cover the cost of the free program. I did not want to embarrass them, and so I did not press the issue, but that conversation underscores widespread attitudes in our society today. Those ladies are not bad people, and they do their jobs very well, but they are totally misinformed about health-care financing and the implications of a nation perpetuating irresponsible medical fiscal policies. As long as everyone is concerned solely with their own good, equitable health care for everyone will be impossible.

Our founding fathers felt that everyone had a right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness — but does everyone have a right to health care? The Bible tells us that almost every time Jesus arrived in a new area, he first healed the sick. These acts of his provided goodwill and credibility, making it much easier for him to talk about the weightier matters of life. Perhaps the lesson for us is to make sure that the basic needs of the most helpless among us are taken care of. Maybe the real question is not whether health care should be available to everyone in our society, but rather how can we provide universal health care in an efficient and cost-effective way.

I have to chuckle when politicians talk about ways to acquire more money to fund solutions to our health care, for we already spend close to twice as much money per capita on health care as the next closest nation in the world. The problem is not allocation of money, but rather how it is spent. If other nations can spend half as much or less and still achieve good basic health care for every one of their citizens, our system must be filled with waste and abuse. Perhaps it was the recognition of this fact that led to massive attempts to reform health care in this nation by the Obama administration. I’m very happy that our politicians are paying attention to this overwhelming problem, but I am less happy about the solutions that have been forced upon the populace. Perhaps well-meaning individuals temporarily forgot that we live in a nation where the majority does not impose its will on the minority simply because it can. Perhaps the better approach is to take a step back and analyze our health-care situation, then apply logic.





THE “SAUDI ARABIAN SOLUTION”


In having an appendectomy in Detroit versus having one in, say, Miami versus having one in New York City, you will find there are myriad different ways that your health-care provider must submit your bill and collect payment. Unfortunately, our health-care insurance system has become so complex that virtually all medical offices and larger practices need billing specialists just to navigate its intricacies. All of this variation and complexity produces mountains of paperwork and requires armies of people to push it around. Funding all these workers causes a larger portion of your health-care dollars to go toward paying administrative costs than the portion that goes to pay the actual professional fees; in fact, about twice as much goes to paper pushers. Imagine how much money we could save if we had a consistent and simplified system for medical billing and collections. Interestingly, every single medical diagnosis carries a designation known as the ICD — 9 code, and every single medical procedure has a designation known as a CPT code. If we created uniform payments for the codes, all bills could be submitted very easily electronically into one common computer system, with virtually instant payment from the insurance companies.

Of course there are always special-interest groups that fight simplification of anything because they benefit from the complexities. In this case, the insurance companies would almost certainly object to such a system, arguing that some unscrupulous doctors would simply submit “evidence” that they had done two appendectomies instead of one and instantly receive payment for two. The insurance companies would claim that, without layers of oversight, the potential for massive fraud would be enormous. Another special-interest group that would likely resist would consist of doctors living in areas where reimbursement is traditionally higher than in the rest of the country. They would certainly not be eager to relinquish their financial advantage.

First of all, as someone who has been in the field of medicine my entire professional life, I can tell you with great certainty that there are very few physicians who would engage in that type of fraud, but there certainly are some. However, the solution for dealing with those few is not to create a gigantic and expensive bureaucracy as we have done, but rather to apply what I term the “Saudi Arabian solution.” Why don’t people steal very often in Saudi Arabia? Obviously because the punishment is the amputation of one or more fingers. I would not advocate chopping off people’s limbs, but there would be some very stiff penalties for this kind of fraud, such as loss of one’s medical license for life, no less than ten years in prison, and loss of all of one’s personal possessions. Not only would this be a gigantic deterrent to fraud, but to protect themselves every physician in practice would check every single bill quite thoroughly before submitting it, which would not be that difficult to do and document.

As for the physicians who live in areas where they are more highly compensated, they would simply have to adjust just like everyone else in society has to during lean times. If there was no difference in payments based on location, you would see specialists disperse from those highly paid areas to other areas throughout the country, which would be wonderful for the nation in terms of access to quality care. This migration of top specialists to other areas of the country is unlikely to affect the quality of care in the large metropolises and would probably even be beneficial because there would be less competition for patients and fewer unnecessary procedures being done in order to stay busy.

When there are too many specialists in one region, it is not uncommon for diseases to be overtreated by those specialists, who all like to be kept busy. The same thing occurs when there are too many medical centers. Everyone wants to be seen as the premier medical center, offering all the latest treatments and technologies. Thus you have massive duplication of medical services, again with an intense desire for all of them to be maximally utilized. It makes a great deal more sense to have each of the medical centers in the same region designated to specialize in only certain areas, with the others taking up the slack. For example, one could serve as the cardiac center, while another serves as the neuroscience center, and yet another could be the renal center.

In order to make a system like this work, reasonable, consistent, and timely payment must be a given. Compensation has to be fair given the investment of time and money necessary to acquire the skills to render good medical care. Compensation cannot be determined by insurance companies, who make more money by elbowing their way in as the middleman and confiscating as much of the transaction between patient and caregiver as they can. It might be smart to couple physician reimbursement to that for lawyers. I say this jokingly because, as everyone knows, lawyers are unlikely to allow their compensation to be reduced by arbitrary outside forces. Physicians generally are not going to fight for themselves, however, which is why it is so easy to take advantage of them, but that certainly is not the case for lawyers. With appropriate time and effort, I am confident that we can come up with an equitable system to take advantage of the ICD — 9 codes, the CPT codes, and computer systems, saving ourselves hundreds of billions of dollars a year that could be used to shore up Medicare or provide for the indigent.





INSURANCE COMPANIES SQUEEZING

OUT THOSE WHO NEED IT MOST


When I first became an attending physician many years ago, our ability to take care of indigent patients was far greater than it is today. Almost all physicians voluntarily devoted a portion of their practice to the poor and indigent, fully recognizing that this represented a financial loss for them. At that time, however, reimbursement from insurance companies was much better than it is today, and our profit margin made charitable care possible and even fun.

Today, to a large extent, insurance companies call the shots on what they want to pay, to whom, and when. Consequently, even busy doctors operate with a very slim profit margin and find it much more difficult to offer care to the poor and pay for it out of their profit. I speak from personal experience because over the last many years, I have had to cut my staff significantly due to low insurance company reimbursements. That cut in staff also means a cut in services that we can offer. Our desire to help more people is at odds with our ability to do so, due to lack of funding. Although I could donate my services, I cannot volunteer the services of my operating room staff or other ancillary personnel to help care for a patient who can’t afford their own medical care.

This is an ideal place for the intervention of government regulators who, with the help of medical professionals, could establish fair and consistent remuneration throughout the country. To accomplish this, essentially all of the insurance companies would have to become nonprofit service organizations with standardized, regulated profit margins. I should quickly add that this is not the paradigm that I see for all businesses, and in fact this is uniquely appropriate for the health-insurance industry, which deals with people’s lives and quality of existence. These things should not be treated like commodities or industrial products. That may sound radical, but is it as radical as allowing a company to increase its profits by denying care to sick individuals? In the long run this would also be good for the insurance companies, who could then concentrate on providing good service to their customers, rather than focusing on undercutting their competitor and increasing their profit margin. It would also drastically decrease the number of people each insurance company would have to hire, all of whom have to be paid out of the health-care dollar. Thus insurance premiums would decline, making health insurance more affordable for everyone.





A HEALTH STAMP PROGRAM?


But what about those who have no health-care insurance? How are we supposed to care for them when we are already stretched to our financial limits? Interestingly enough, there aren’t, in fact, 52 million people without health-care insurance in this country1 — all they have to do is go to the emergency room where by law they must be taken care of if they truly have an emergency. The problem is, emergency care costs five times as much as it would if they were getting regular preventive care in a clinic. And, unfortunately, the rest of us pay for it. The logical question we should ask then is, how do we get those same people to go to the clinic instead?

First of all, we must recognize that we are already paying for their care at a much higher rate when they show up in the emergency room. If we can get them to go to the clinic, however, we will still be paying for their health care, but at a much lower rate. We might do well to look at another government program that has been around for decades and saved millions of people from chronic hunger. The food stamp program allocates money for food in an electronic account at the beginning of each month. People learn very quickly not to go out the first five days and buy porterhouse steak, leaving them with nothing to spend on food for the rest of the month. They learn to look for bargains and other ways to stretch their allocation for the entire month. If we had electronic medical accounts for the indigent in this country, they too would have incentive to save money when medical problems arose. For example, if Mr. Smith has a diabetic foot ulcer and goes to the emergency room, he will be adequately patched up and sent out — but if he goes to the clinic, not only will he be paying much less, but he will be patched up and an attempt will be made to get his diabetes under control, hopefully preventing a trip back in three weeks with another diabetic complication.

By looking at preventive care and wellness, we as a society will begin to save enormous amounts of money while achieving a significantly higher level of health. This is especially important as our population continues to age, since aging is accompanied by a slew of medical problems that can be avoided or reduced if detected early. Also, I am very fond of saying that if everyone ate three well-balanced meals each day, drank eight glasses of water or water-equivalent substances, regularly got a full night’s sleep, regularly exercised, and did not smoke or put harmful substances into their bodies, we in the medical profession would become very bored. Unfortunately, given the state of health in our nation, I don’t think we have to worry about that anytime soon.





BRINGING DOWN THE COST OF HEALTH CARE


Often when people are looking for a new job, they’re very interested in the health-care benefits that are offered. Because health-care insurance has become so expensive, most people are not able to afford it on their own and therefore need to be sure that their employer includes this as a benefit. But why is health-care insurance so expensive?

Much of the expense is due to coverage of catastrophic medical events. There was a time when premature babies or babies with significant birth defects simply died, which cost the insurance company very little. Now, however, thanks to developments in medical technology, we’re able to put such babies in incubators and treat them, usually saving their lives — but then we hand the insurance company a bill for $1 million. We can take an eighty-five-year-old woman with diabetes, hypertension, and thyroid disease who develops a brain tumor or cardiac condition, and successfully treat her, and then give the insurance company a bill for a few hundred thousand dollars. This kind of scenario, repeated on a regular basis, drove insurance companies to drastically increase their premiums, resulting in the situation we have today. I certainly applaud all the medical advances that have lengthened all of our lives while giving us quality of life, but there must be a logical solution to the ever-rising cost of insurance premiums.

One solution would be to remove from the insurance companies the responsibility for catastrophic health-care coverage, making it a government responsibility. I can hear someone shouting now that the government can never do anything correctly, but I beg to differ. It is because of a government program known as FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) that most of us are able to afford our homeowners insurance. If there were no FEMA, Allstate, State Farm, Nationwide, and all the other homeowner insurance companies would be telling us that they had to drastically increase premiums because there might be an earthquake, tornado, hurricane, tsunami, or other natural disaster that would otherwise drain their coffers. Homeowners’ insurance would be so expensive that you would have to ask your employer to cover it.

Clearly, if the health-care insurance companies did not have to cover catastrophic health care, it would be relatively easy by analyzing actuarial tables to determine how much money they are likely to be liable for each year, which of course would determine how much money they had to take in. With this information at our disposal, health insurance companies could be regulated just as utilities are regulated. If we did not regulate utilities, few people would be able to afford their water or electricity.

The next question, of course, is, how will the government pay for catastrophic health care? This is open for debate, but I think it would be quite reasonable to allow insurance companies a 15 percent annual profit, 5 percent of which would go to the government’s national catastrophic health-care fund. Since the government would now have the responsibility of paying for catastrophic health care, we as a society would be forced to examine the policies that have led to a situation in which 40 to 50 percent of all health-care dollars are spent during the last six months of a person’s life. We put dying people in intensive care units while testing, poking, and prodding them until they render up their last breath. Unlike most other countries of the world, many of us do not seem to acknowledge that death is not optional. It is perfectly reasonable to send terminal patients to hospice, where compassionate and comfortable care can be rendered until death takes place. Much of the excessive care that currently occurs when a patient is terminal is given by health-care providers who fear lawsuits if they fail to provide that care. Others are simply procedure-oriented, recognizing that they will be paid whether the patient survives or not. Fortunately, these individuals are relatively rare in the medical profession. Again, I can hear some people screaming after reading this that I am advocating for “death panels.” Some people like to put forth terms like this because they stir up emotional responses rather than encouraging people to engage in rational dialogue aimed at resolving issues. Obviously, as our population ages and as our medical technology becomes more sophisticated and expensive, the potential for bankrupting our society with medical costs skyrockets.

We are facing a time when we have to be pragmatic, while at the same time exercising compassion. One day, we will be able to keep the average person alive for 150 or even 200 years due to medical advances, and we will then be faced with the question, should we use our advanced knowledge in a way that will rapidly overpopulate the world? The emotional answer would be, yes, of course, we should use our knowledge to extend every life, and we can worry about the consequences later. A more rational response would include examining the effect on the entire population of such action and perhaps advocating a more measured course of action.

I remember a case of a prominent individual who had been in an automobile accident and was rendered a C – 1 quadriplegic, which means not only was he paralyzed from the neck down, but he could not breathe without assistance. We could have made the decision to keep him alive at all costs, but through a unique system of communication that we were able to work out with him, he indicated that he wanted to die. After much debate, we yielded to his wishes and withdrew ventilatory support. In the long run, I think our course of action was both compassionate and pragmatic. If we integrate compassion and logic into our decision-making processes, I am convinced that we will deal with newly emerging ethical dilemmas appropriately.

When I was a member of the President’s Council on Bioethics, discussions on matters such as these were very complex, but they need to be engaged in now to avoid a reactive situation in the future. I believe age should not be the determining factor of the level of care that should be given. Rather we should consider a person’s potential for quality long-term survival. Many people in their eighties and nineties are very productive members of society, and they certainly should not be denied insurance coverage for certain procedures simply because of age alone. Approaching these problems with logic rather than with emotion leading us will yield the right answers, but it will require in-depth discussions by wise people. As the Bible says, “In the multitude of counsellors there is safety” (Proverbs 11:14).

When a society faces major changes, such as drastically increased life expectancy, its people should examine the effects of such a change and make logical, appropriate adjustments. We should thoroughly examine the effects of our aging society on our way of life and devise compassionate methods of easing the burden of aging both on the individual and the family.





PRODUCING AND PROTECTING OUR

HEALTH-CARE DOLLARS


“The only thing that prevents us from having the most fabulous health-care packages imaginable for every citizen of the United States is lack of money,” some may say. How can we get more money to invest in health care? Perhaps, as some have suggested, we can simply tax the rich since they have plenty and should be willing to share with everyone. Another idea — which now perhaps seems radical, but once was a pillar of the American way — is to grow the economy, providing a lift for every segment of society.

Consider the following story to illustrate: There once were two brothers, each of whom got married, had children, and moved to separate deserted islands. Their diet consisted solely of trees, and they could eat every part of the tree, including the roots, bark, branches, and leaves. The family of one of the brothers always monitored the new growth of trees and anxiously devoured every tender sapling, which of course never allowed them to grow into mature trees. Eventually, that family ate every sapling on the island and died of starvation. The other family was very disciplined and — while they ate some of the trees — allowed most of the saplings to grow into mature trees, providing them with unlimited food forever.

This is a simple story, but it is easy to see how it applies to a government that continues to tax the rich until there are no more rich, and then begins to tax everyone else without ever curbing its growth or its appetite for money. Eventually it destroys itself. A much wiser government in need of money would examine the methods used by the rich to obtain their wealth and would try to create an economic environment that would cultivate even more rich people, all of whom would pay their fair share of taxes, vastly increasing the government’s coffers. In other words, the more productive people you have in your society, the bigger your tax base, and if those people are paying their proportionate share based on income, it will be a big win for the government. All we have to do is study our nation’s own history of entrepreneurial innovation2 to understand what needs to be done to rev up our economy once again.

Generating more money to go toward our nation’s health care also requires protecting the money we have — and we lose tens of billions of dollars to Medicare and Medicaid fraud every year. This is something we have not been able to control, either because we don’t care very much and view other issues as much more important, or because we are incompetent. Both of these problems we can fix, which gives me hope that we will not forever be robbed. If we are ever going to have adequate funding for health care and other major line items in our budget, however, we have to put an end to waste and fraud throughout the government, and we must create a friendly climate for economic growth.

These are such basic, commonsense ideas, I have a hard time understanding why so many of our government officials totally lack insight on this. I have heard important people in Washington say that fraud, waste, and abuse are an integral part of our system of government and that there is really nothing to be done about it. I hope and pray that we have not fallen to accepting the very things our founding fathers so desperately wanted to avoid. We cannot capitulate to moral decay, and our history dictates that we should not give up this fight.

It is extremely difficult to estimate how much money is wasted in the health-care arena because doctors engage in defensive medicine to avoid lawsuits. During the health-care debate prior to the passage of the bill in 2010, many opponents of tort reform said that adding that to the health-care bill would only save us in the neighborhood of $5 billion a year. That $5 billion is nothing to sneeze at, but I think the savings would be much greater than that. Many more tests and procedures are ordered than are needed to bolster the defense in case of a lawsuit. My wife and I were at a public forum in Virginia during the fall before the health-care law was voted on and one of the speakers was Dr. Howard Dean, whose campaign for president some years ago famously ended with a wild scream. I do not agree with many of his political views, but he is an honest individual as far as politicians go. Someone asked him the question, “Why is tort reform not included in the health-care bill?”

“It’s really quite simple,” he replied. “The Trial Lawyers Association gives us [the Democratic Party] a great deal of money, and they don’t want it in there.”

Many people in the audience were shocked at his candor. He only said what many of us knew was true, but very few in the Democratic Party were willing to admit it. As a neurosurgeon, which is one of the two most-sued specialties, I have witnessed many lawsuits against doctors that destroyed careers, confidence, and families when the doctor had done nothing wrong. Unfortunately, in many such cases a patient suffered an unfortunate outcome, even though everyone was trying extremely hard to solve the problem. In our country there is no way to recoup lost income, lost potential, or other losses, including emotional distress, other than filing a lawsuit against the health-care provider or the hospital.

Most other countries have figured out a way to take care of injured individuals by providing some form of redress, but our great nation simply has no clue how to solve this problem. Obviously that’s not true, and like almost everything else in our nation that doesn’t make any sense politically, a special interest group is heavily involved behind the scenes. In this case, it’s the Trial Lawyers Association. As long as we continue to empower and submit to the influence of special interest groups, nothing we do will ever make sense or benefit the general populace.

By dealing with the problems I’ve discussed in this chapter, we could reduce the cost of our health-care insurance to the point that most individuals and families could afford to own their own policies. This would provide portability between health-care providers (limiting exclusions for preexisting conditions) and the potential to further reduce health-care premiums for those with healthy lifestyles. For instance, if people owned their own policy, a premium reduction could be offered for anyone having an annual physical examination. We would detect many medical problems during the early stages of development, when treatment is much easier and less expensive. Also, if the patient owns his or her own health-care policy, the doctor would not likely order excessive testing without being questioned about it, since doing so could impact the patient’s premiums. A fiduciary relationship would develop between the doctor and patient since there is no detached third party receiving the bills — and that, of course, would result in tremendous savings. In other words, your doctor’s responsibility would shift from what is required by the insurance company to what is medically and financially good for you, the patient. Also, if people owned their own health-care policies, they would not have to relinquish them when they turned sixty-five, which might alleviate some of the pressure on Medicare. These are only a few of many ideas to solve our health-care crisis.

As we continue to try to improve health-care access and quality for everyone, we might do well to ask ourselves the question, if the Golden Gate Bridge fell down, who would we get to rebuild it — structural engineers or people who like to talk about building bridges? In like fashion, we would be wise to put health-care reform in the hands of the people who know the most about health care — those providing the care and those receiving it.





— CHAPTER 11 —





A NATION DIVIDED


GROWING UP IN BOSTON AND DETROIT, I had political views that largely reflected those of the adults around me. Family, friends, and neighbors generally felt that they had been oppressed and that the responsibility for redressing these injustices rested with the government or with others. By the time I reached high school, the civil rights movement was in full swing, and the Democratic Party was positioning itself as the champion of civil rights. Like most young black people, I accepted the label of Democrat and endeavored to be a part of that struggle. After President Kennedy was assassinated and Lyndon B. Johnson took over, a host of social programs were unleashed, aimed at helping oppressed minorities and people like us living in poverty. I was particularly thrilled with Johnson’s “War on Poverty,” which I thought would significantly improve our family’s lifestyle. Even though my mother worked very hard cleaning other people’s houses, we still benefitted from government commodities such as cheese and flour. We also received food stamps and bus tokens. Even though she was not a welfare mom, my mother still very much appreciated the government assistance we did receive from time to time. Still, I had an inherent dislike for government assistance and was frankly quite embarrassed that we had to accept anything from them.

By the time I entered college at Yale University, I was running away from poverty and didn’t want to discuss that part of my life with anyone. But neither did I identify with the wealth on constant display at Yale. At that time in my life, I was proud to see groups such as the Black Panthers standing up to brutal police tactics, and though I never joined any radical student organizations, I kept abreast of the activities of the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), the Weathermen, and other groups willing to use aggressive tactics to accomplish “social justice.” When George McGovern became the Democratic nominee to run for president of the United States, I voted for him enthusiastically along with multitudes of young people, all of us looking forward to a utopian world of peace and love. We envisioned it as a world without war, racism, or poverty. Plenty of hippies and flower children around me smoked pot, used illicit drugs, and engaged in free love as part of that utopian dream.

Because of my love of God and my religious upbringing, I didn’t become involved in sex or drugs, but I still identified strongly with the antiwar protesters and the revolutionaries. I was quite unhappy when George McGovern was soundly defeated by Richard Nixon in 1972 and it looked as if life would go on as usual. I was a senior in college at the time and starting to think more about medical school than social justice.

When I entered medical school the following fall, I immersed myself deeply in my studies and paid little attention to the political scene. The first year of medical school required a significant lifestyle adjustment in order to master so much material. There was not a lot of compassion for students who fell behind, and I saw many of my friends’ hopes and dreams shattered by the merciless monster of academia.

As I struggled early on, my academic advisor strongly suggested that I forget about medical school and pursue another area of study. Fortunately I ignored his advice and redoubled my efforts to succeed. It meant getting up at 6 a.m. and studying constantly until 11 p.m. six days a week, only taking off the Sabbath in order to recharge my batteries. That intensive effort not only salvaged my academic career, but allowed me to flourish and begin to earn top grades and respect from teachers and students alike. Although I was still a Jimmy Carter Democrat, I was starting to sympathize with people who advocated for personal responsibility and self-reliance, since those were the traits largely responsible for my success in medical school.

By the time I began training as a neurosurgical resident at Johns Hopkins, I began paying attention to politics again and was particularly intrigued by the optimistic speeches of Jimmy Carter versus the no-nonsense, very practical — although sometimes harsh — speeches of Ronald Reagan. Although Reagan’s logical approach to many of our social and international problems appealed to me, he was a Republican. Because of my bias in favor of the Democratic Party, I figured Reagan must, by definition, be greedy, selfish, and callous toward the poor.

As I got to know more Republicans and conservatives, however, I came to realize that many of my political beliefs were based on nothing other than propaganda, and that there were just as many decent Republicans as there were decent Democrats. I found that it was the Republicans who were responsible for the abolition of slavery and for the passage of the Civil Rights Act. I also began to realize that it was not political biases that were largely responsible for the plight of African-Americans in our nation, but rather racist attitudes. After the many gains realized through the civil rights movement, racist people from both parties adopted a paternalistic attitude toward African-Americans and enacted federal and state programs designed to take care of people who couldn’t take care of themselves — people who were ignorant, stupid, or just plain lazy. In the process of being “do-gooders,” both Republicans and Democrats removed much of the drive and determination from innumerable African-Americans, who found it easier to accept government charity than continue on a path of hard work and self-reliance. Once people learn that their irresponsible behavior, such as having babies that they cannot care for, results in larger paychecks from the government, those lifestyle choices have negative implications for the entire nation for generations to come. Any attempt to withdraw government charity is seen as a heartless attack upon the most vulnerable members of our society. Most of the national media had aligned themselves with those involved in the civil rights struggle, which was the right thing to do. Unfortunately, most of the media also failed to recognize the long-term harm caused by those with good intentions who were robbing poor families of the incentive to obtain the American dream through their own efforts.

This kind of smothering political “compassion” that skewed the mindset of large segments of our nation’s populace after the gains of the civil rights movement reminds me of the problems facing Yellowstone National Park in the 1950s. Many tourists, full of good intentions, were eager to feed the bears, who were very cute in their antics to encourage visitors to hand over food. The bears quickly lost their fear of people, and instead of hunting for their traditional prey, they began invading camps and breaking into cars and campers looking for food. The forest rangers quickly realized they had a major problem on their hands, one that endangered the tourists’ lives. The park enacted rules forbidding feeding of the bears, which exacerbated the situation acutely for a while. But through brilliant management, the bear population relearned how to fend for themselves and began to stay away from the people.

I am not equating people to animals, of course, but rather simply making the point that it is quite easy to become accustomed to an easier way of life, and after a while to believe that one has a right to that easier way of life. As I witnessed this happening decades ago throughout our nation, however, I came to believe that we were robbing people of their dignity and the desire to support themselves. Even though I ultimately voted for Jimmy Carter both in 1976 and 1980, my political views were gradually shifting, and by 1984, those views were much more consistent with Ronald Reagan’s and those of the Republican Party. I was particularly disenchanted with the extreme partisanship of the Democratic Party at the time, which drove me even further toward the right. Then, when the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke in 1997, I witnessed the extreme partisan politics coming from the Republican Party, which I equally detested. It was quite clear to me that both parties needed to re-examine their values, or lack thereof.

Over the years, I found that no political party really represented my views of fairness, decency, and adherence to the principles set forth by the United States Constitution in 1787. So I became a registered Independent and have remained so until this day. I hope and pray that someday politicians on both sides of the aisle will learn to work together and not see each other as mortal enemies. Working toward compromise to solutions for the common good of the people is the only way that our leaders will be able to solve the enormous problems faced by our nation.

The lives of some close friends of ours were destroyed due to lack of compromise. The husband felt that he had a special gift of singing and used a great deal of the family’s resources to pay for voice lessons. The wife was in the health-care profession and worked overtime to take care of the family needs, and she strongly disagreed with the way her husband was “squandering” the money. In his opinion, however, he was “investing” in a wonderful future. They were unable to resolve their differences, and one night I was awakened by a phone call informing me that the husband, wife, and one of their children had been killed in an accident. The wife, very distraught, had been driving very fast and had plowed the car into the back of a tractor-trailer truck, killing everyone. This needless tragedy could have been avoided if all were in a better frame of mind, willing to have some reasonable give-and-take. In the same way, many of the problems facing our nation today could be resolved if only the two sides were able to reason together and compromise when necessary.





FINGER-POINTING FUTILITY


When constructive compromise on the part of both political parties is supplanted with a winner-takes-all battle of wills, the wheels of US progress seize up. And when our leaders refer to members of the opposite party as “enemies” one minute and then proclaim how important it is to have civil discourse and cooperation the next minute, it is not hard to understand why people become hardened to anything a politician says these days. But perhaps skepticism toward our leadership suggests we are close to returning to the founders’ original intent of limited government and more local, individual responsibility. As a result, politicians would become less important to our country’s direction, government would become smaller, and people would step back into the role of taking charge of their own lives. It may seem like a pipe dream, but I truly believe it is possible.

We frequently hear it said that hatred among voters and politicians alike toward the opposite political party is worse today than it has ever been. But a careful reading of historical documents, including political commentaries and cartoons, shows that the differences between what were known as the Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party were every bit as intense — if not more so — in the days of Alexander Hamilton than what we see today. Some of those philosophical differences, in fact, eventually led to the fatal duel in which Hamilton was murdered by Burr.

Because we now have twenty-four-hour news cycles and cable channels, we have constant analysis of political bickering by mostly partisan correspondents and pundits. Even if the Democrats and Republicans were not enemies, many news agencies profit from the controversy by constantly stoking the flames of disagreements. Unfortunately, Democrats and Republicans today do appear to be mortal enemies, much to the detriment of our country. The vitriol hurled across the aisle from both parties is staggering, yet they both seem totally incapable of looking in the mirror and recognizing their own hypocrisy. When the party becomes more important than principle, we are in dire straits, for it reveals that our leaders are incapable or unwilling to think critically for themselves. No two people should think exactly alike on all issues, even if they are members of the same party, because people have different experiences that have shaped their lives and their perspectives.





THE BEAUTY OF DIVERSITY


I recently attended a rather elegant dinner party in Washington, DC, and had an opportunity to speak at length with Republican Senator Scott Brown of Massachusetts. I told him how much I admired the fact that over the past several months he had been the object of scorn by both Democrats and Republicans because his votes are based on his principles and beliefs rather than on the party line. If everyone in the United States Senate voted that way, I believe we would all be shocked by how rational and reasonable the bills would be coming out of the congressional chambers. Unfortunately, the polarity we see in Democratic and Republican stands on issues suggests that many of our representatives have become puppets of their political party. All voters would be wise to look at their representatives’ voting records to see if they agree with their views or whether they are always consistent with the party view. If your views and their views coincide the vast majority of the time and the areas where they do not coincide are not deal breakers, then this is likely someone who represents you well. If, on the other hand, you find major disagreements with your point of view, you should do the responsible thing, which is to vote for the person who represents your views regardless of party affiliation. If we all made a concerted effort to do this, I believe we would be delighted with Congress and their actions instead of having a congressional body with an approval rating of less than 20 percent.

The strength and unity of our nation was severely threatened by secessionists in the mid-1800s, those who wanted to form the Confederate States of America in the South to maintain the practice of slavery as a way of life. Rather than allow the nation to be split and substantially weakened, a great Civil War was fought, which was extremely costly both in terms of lives and resources, but the nation was saved and the seeds of a superpower were sown. There are many who feel that our country is in as much danger of self-destruction today as we were prior to the Civil War because of the marked philosophical differences that divide us. During the Civil War, the issue at stake was slavery, whereas today the issue is personal responsibility versus governmental responsibility. Hopefully we will not have to engage in a political civil war before we achieve the kind of unity that will again bring us strength and prosperity.

There is perhaps more hope for our country than currently meets the eye. It would seem as if we are hopelessly gridlocked by Democrats and Republicans, each with very different ideas of government and its role in our lives. The ray of hope is found in the fact that there is an ever-increasing number of Independent voters who sometimes vote one way and other times vote another way, and therefore cannot be taken for granted by either party. There is also the rise of the Tea Party, which is interested in limited government according to the United States Constitution, capitalism with free enterprise, tax reform, sovereignty of the states consistent with the Constitution, border control, and fiscal responsibility. The very fact that so many people are joining the Tea Party or becoming politically Independent suggests that people are less willing to be spoon-fed by a largely biased media and are thinking for themselves again.

I believe the new Tea Party is going to be very important in deciding the future direction of our country. By its very nature, it is unlikely to ever become a well-organized political party, and it represents different things to different people, but the one factor that brings all of its constituents together is the desire for individual freedom and less government in our lives.





NO BASIS FOR CLASS WARFARE


Having had the opportunity to experience virtually every economic class in our society firsthand, I have found very little difference between people from the lower-middle class all the way to the upper echelons of the upper class in terms of financial values and belief in a strong work ethic. Most of the rich in America do not expect special treatment, nor do they get it unless they pay handsomely for it. Our society is very egalitarian, with a kind of social mingling and camaraderie not found in other nations around the world.

I mention these values because there is really no natural basis for class warfare here in America. After all, relatively few people begrudge the wealthy of the things they have acquired honestly. Honestly is, of course, the key word there, for I also know few people of any socioeconomic status who are not outraged that so many Wall Street fat cats experienced personal financial windfalls during the financial meltdown of many financial institutions in 2008 and 2009.

There continues to be an element, primarily in the Democratic Party, however, who use such abuses of the capitalist system to constantly evoke class warfare. They know that if they can get poor people to believe that they are the ones advocating for them, and that the other party advocates only for the rich, then it is very likely that the poor will vote for them in overwhelming numbers — and, of course, there are a lot more poor people than there are rich people. By attempting to associate Americans who are well off due to their extremely hard work and honest efforts with those despicable, greedy financiers, they distort reality. For these are by no means the same kinds of people, and, in fact, the hard-working, honest rich are the primary providers of jobs that allow us to have a middle class in this country. If we demonize, persecute, and overtax such people, they will become unsure of themselves and considerably less productive, which will have a devastating impact on the general economy, both because they are not spending and because they are not creating jobs.

Class warfare is an artificial division created for political advantage, and it should be rejected outright by the American people — for we have far too many real problems to devote energy to artificial ones.





DO UNIONS TRULY UNITE OR DIVIDE?


Another growing division in our nation exists between people who are unionized and those who are not. The concept of unions is actually quite good, and they played a very important role in the industrial development of our nation. The initial idea was “strength through unity” to keep unscrupulous owners/employers from taking advantage of defenseless workers. Without them, it is unlikely that we would have ever developed a robust middle class.

As time has gone on, however, many employees who are already well protected, such as government workers, have insisted on unionizing in order to strengthen their hands during collective bargaining. Initially, this was about getting the highest possible salaries, but now collective bargaining includes tenure, vacations, class size for teachers, meals, and a host of other things that frequently are not available to the general public.

In many cases, unions have now evolved to gain unfair political advantage based on the numbers of potential votes that can be delivered and the amount of money that can be donated to political causes. Leaders of many of these unions see nothing wrong with coercing members to donate a portion of their salary for dues, which they use to create very large monetary war chests for political campaigns. They then elect politicians who are obligated to them, allowing them to further enhance their positions financially, socially, and politically. In a twist of history from unions’ original intention, sometimes the unions become the bullies against whom other people need protection. I do not believe that the average union worker grew up thinking that they should have unfair advantages over everyone else, but many union leaders try to create an entitlement mentality among their constituents. Once people get used to having certain advantages, they will fight vigorously to keep them.

Again, it is time for us as a nation to step back and ask ourselves, who is really being treated unfairly — unionized government workers or taxpayers who have to support unaffordable benefits? If we can just stop being selfish and think about “liberty and justice for all,” we will not tolerate rabble-rousers endeavoring to create a need and a well-paid position for themselves.

Having said all of that, there are businesses and industries that do try to take advantage of individual workers, and unions are very effective in those situations — but this does not mean that everyone needs a union. If physicians were unionized, it is likely that they would bargain for higher pay and fewer hours. It is unlikely that they would accept the sometimes meager reimbursements from insurance companies, and they would demand significant tort reform. I can hear the union bosses saying that those are just the things that doctors should be complaining about, and that they are foolish to allow themselves to be abused by an unfair system. I fully agree that many aspects of the medical profession are less than optimal, but we have jobs that allow us to help people and save their lives. These jobs provide a great deal of fulfillment and satisfaction, and there is no need to squeeze every drop of blood out of the proverbial turnip. If physicians join together, however, and demand job perks for us as physicians simply because we provide a unique, indispensable service, doesn’t that make us blackmailers? I am only using physicians as the example here because I am a physician, but the point is that it is rarely necessary to divide ourselves into special interest groups to gain advantages, and that much more progress can and will be made when we place our emphasis on creating opportunities for everyone as opposed to creating unfair advantages for those with the power to do so.





PROGRESS IN THE RACE AGAINST RACISM


The election of Barack Obama as the first black president in 2008 was a momentous occasion and signaled the fact that race was no longer a barrier to election to the highest office in the land. However, people still disagree about whether or not the United States remains racially divided.

Over the last two decades, I believe a great deal of progress has been made. During that time, many minorities have assumed important and very visible positions in our society and performed extremely well, eliminating anxiety on the part of the majority about their capabilities. Today one would have to live a fairly sheltered life in a highly biased community to harbor the belief that someone is inferior simply because of the color of their skin.

This does not mean that racism has disappeared completely from America, but it is gradually becoming a dinosaur in communities of educated people. I do know some who feel quite differently and think racism is alive and well. When I was a psychology major in college, one of the things I learned — which in retrospect is really only common sense — is that people tend to see what they are looking for. If you think someone likes you, you are likely to interpret their words and actions very differently than if you think they hate you. Prejudice is generally born out of ignorance and the propagation of myths; fortunately, Hollywood and the media have eliminated a great deal of misinformation about different races and nationalities.

In the national elections of 2012, we will have a wonderful opportunity to really see whether we have largely vanquished racism in America. Part of that final shift will require white America to set behind them the notion that most black candidates running for office share the same political left-wing leanings held by President Obama, and to embrace the process of scrutinizing candidates’ positions rather than simply making assumptions about them. Doing so will help confirm that the evil of racism is losing its hold in this nation once defined by it.





DO OUR RELIGIOUS BELIEFS DIVIDE?


Unlike the division caused by racism, which seems to be shrinking, the division caused by religious differences seems to be intensifying, with the greatest conflict between Islam and Christianity. I was recently at a university-hosted dinner for a well-known expert on Islamic culture, and I asked him if it were possible for Islam and Christianity to peacefully coexist. It was clear that the question made him very uncomfortable, but he answered it honestly and said, unfortunately, it is not possible because some Islamists believe that Christians and Jews are infidels who should either be converted or at the very least avoided. It is very important to remember, however, that there are 1.4 billion Muslims in the world and to paint them with a single philosophical brush is just as absurd as trying to characterize the diverse thinking of billions of Christians around the world.

Perhaps the real problem with Islam is its radical faction, which has grown dramatically in recent years. Large groups of Muslim youths growing up in poverty-stricken areas in the Middle East and Africa, without a great deal of exposure to other religions and cultures, become relatively easy pickings for radical Islamic terrorists. These terrorist factions extract portions of the Koran, which they distort and use to convince these energetic but misdirected young people to join the “holy jihad” and receive an everlasting reward. With more than one billion Muslims in the world, there are certainly enough radical Islamists among them to cause concern. It is the quickest expanding religion in the world, but by births not by conversions. With a number of that magnitude and the intensity of their hatred, it is easy to see how this can be an enormous problem both now and in the future. At least knowing the numbers gives us some perspective on whether this problem can be ignored or deserves our full attention and efforts to address it.

Christianity, Islam, and Judaism all sprang from the seed of Abraham, which might lead one to believe that the religions should have enough in common to peacefully coexist. And if you exclude the radical elements of each religion, harmony should be within reach since peace, love, and fairness are foundational pillars of each of the religions. Since the vast majority of each religion’s constituents embrace the concept of peace, it is incumbent upon those members to control their radical elements. This means they have to confront the radical elements who advocate violence and often the very principles that constitute their belief system. This must be done both publicly and privately, and they have to use every means available to them to eliminate this cancer among them. If they are afraid or refuse to stand up to the radicals among them, they will share in the guilt for the worldwide holocaust that will ensue. The only way in which religious division will not be highly destructive is if people embrace and live up to the precepts and principles of their respective religions.





WHAT THEN UNITES US?


In conclusion, many other factors such as sexism and ageism threaten our unity as a nation, but perhaps the most important factor is not what divides us, but rather what unites us.

Proverbs 29:18 says, “Where there is no vision, the people perish.” One defining feature of an outstanding leader is the ability to bring divergent groups together and unite them in a common mission with benefits for all. Unfortunately, it is becoming increasingly difficult to discern what the vision for America is. Do we really know who we are and what we stand for? Do we know what we believe in, or are we constantly walking around with our fingertips in the air, trying to decide which way the wind is blowing at any given moment? Are we willing to think for ourselves, or do we believe media pundits have all the answers? Our founding fathers placed so much emphasis on nurturing a well-educated populace because they knew that our system of democracy could not long survive with ignorant and uncaring citizens who could easily be manipulated by slick politicians.

As we enter the next election season, I hope we will each be willing to take a step back and ask the question, what is of crucial importance to me and to the future of our nation?





— CHAPTER 12 —





LIBERTY AND

JUSTICE FOR ALL


GROWING UP changes one’s definition of what is fun — maturation does that, thankfully — so I hate to admit now that as a boy I thoroughly enjoyed throwing rocks at cars. It was a thrill to wait in hiding, ambush the car driving by, and then make our escape. Occasionally, a driver would stop their vehicle and get out to yell at us. But if we were really fortunate, they would chase us. We would run just far enough ahead to encourage them, but when they got close, we would turn on the afterburners of youth, leaving them far behind while we laughed hysterically.

Once in a while, the police would come by — usually in unmarked cars — and the chase would be much more dramatic until we reached the ten-foot-tall fences at the end of the neighborhood field. To the police, it must have appeared as if they had us trapped. They had no idea, however, how practiced we were at vaulting those fences. We treated it like an Olympic event, running at full speed toward the fence and then leaping high into the air, grabbing the chain links, and allowing the momentum of our feet to swing us over the top and down on the other side. We would laugh at the police as we ran off, knowing there was no way they would follow us.

Today I have great admiration for the police, who risk their lives on a daily basis to protect our lives, freedom, and property. Remove all police protection in our society for just a day, and imagine the mayhem that would ensue. Sure, corruption exists in some police departments, because police officers are human beings like the rest of us; give power to human beings and corruption naturally follows. But police provide far greater good than bad in our society. Our justice system may have plenty of opportunities to malfunction, but we should not give up on it and must continually, objectively evaluate potential improvements.

When I started reading as a boy and began getting serious about my future, I was deeply encouraged by stories of those who had gone from rags to riches. One of the things virtually all of them had in common was that they benefitted from the freedom and justice in our system of government. I believe that all of these people would tell you that the only thing they really ever asked for was a fair chance to work hard, prove their worth, and benefit personally from their own efforts.

When we stand, place our hand over our heart, and before our country’s flag pledge “with liberty and justice for all,” we are simply saying that we want a nation that allows everyone to pursue their dreams as long as they are not injuring someone else, and that we will protect their right to do so. We should never underestimate the huge role that our justice system carries out in creating “fair play,” allowing individuals to be successful in a large and complex society where given half a chance bullies will take advantage of anyone. Our legal system is rather large and cumbersome, but in the long run I would not trade it for any other system in the world.

I was recently summoned to fulfill my civic duty as a petit juror. When I first received the notice, I began thinking of all the patient surgeries and clinical appointments I would have to cancel in order to serve, but then I remembered that an obligation is an obligation no matter who you are and what you have to do. If some of us think we are too important to fulfill our civic duties, the very strength that our wonderful judicial system is built on in drawing from a diverse pool of jurors breaks down. I will confess that I was in the courthouse from 8:30 a.m. until a little after 6 p.m. essentially wasting my time. I was being considered as a juror for two cases, both of which were medical malpractice cases, and I knew there was no way on earth that the plaintiff’s attorneys in either case would accept a neurosurgeon as a juror. I’m sure the judges knew that also; nevertheless, we spent several hours going through the motions and eventually jurors were selected. Do I think there are more efficient ways to select jurors? Of course I do. But I also realize that there will always be imperfections and room for improvement, and as long as we continue to work toward those improvements without being overly critical, we will make progress on improving a system that is already one of the best in the world.

My first time in court — and one of the only times — I was a neurosurgical resident at Johns Hopkins. I had been driving my car on a newly opened stretch of highway, going fifty-five miles per hour, when I was pulled over by a policeman.

“Sir, did you know that you were exceeding the speed limit by fifteen miles per hour?” he asked.

I was still surprised and confused about why I had been pulled over. “Well,” I replied, “I was only going fifty-five. The speed limit is fifty-five miles per hour.”

“No, sir,” he replied. “The speed limit here is forty miles per hour.”

“Where is that posted?” I asked.

“At the entrance to the highway, sir.” He issued me a speeding violation and told me that I should go to court if I felt strongly about it.

Ultimately, I did decide to go to court to plead my case, but when I arrived and was waiting for my turn to approach the bench, I began having second thoughts about the wisdom of being there as I watched how stern the judge was with others. Finally it was my turn and I approached the bench.

“What do you do for work?” asked the judge.

“I am a neurosurgical resident at Johns Hopkins Hospital,” I replied.

He looked up. My answer had brought a smile to his face. “Do you happen to know a neurosurgeon there by the name of Dr. John Chambers?”

“Sure,” I said. “I operate with Dr. Chambers all the time.”

“He’s a good fishing buddy of mine,” the judge said thoughtfully. He paused a moment. “Case dismissed,” he said. “Next case.” The poor police officer who had given me the ticket was astonished, and I exited the courtroom triumphantly.

Although it may seem that the judge was unfairly biased in my favor, I’m sure he knew the facts of the case and also knew that I had a perfectly clean driving record. Nevertheless, this case does point out how arbitrary some decisions can be — and those decisions can have profound effects on people’s lives. This is the reason the founders of our judicial system inserted a provision to recall or dismiss rogue judges. They realized that judges are also people who can be quite imperfect like the rest of us, or who can become corrupted or even demented.

I do not wish to imply that our nation is the only nation with a solid judicial system. After I finished my neurosurgical residency at Johns Hopkins, Candy and I spent a year in Australia — as I mentioned earlier — where Murray, our oldest son was born. One evening we were driving down a hill and noticed a large number of cars at the bottom, some of which were police cars. We were soon stopped by a police officer on the street, who stated that we were exceeding the speed limit. The police had set up a speed trap at the base of the hill, realizing that almost everyone would be speeding by the time they hit the bottom due to their momentum. They were using radar guns, which they were all too happy to show to the disgruntled, entrapped travelers. I argued with the police, stating that they were engaging in entrapment. I told them that I was an American citizen and that we rarely did such things in America. They invited me to go to court and state my case, which I decided to do.

The judge there must have been in a particularly bad mood because he was slamming everyone, most of whom had legal counsel. Alone in a foreign country, I was feeling very vulnerable, and I asked God to give me wisdom as I approached the bench. The judge had already heard about the circumstances of my case, because some of the other victims of that evening had just argued in vain for mercy. I started my defense by talking about radar equipment and their use of Doppler waves to detect speed. I told him that the accuracy of such equipment could legitimately be called into question when it is used on an angle, which rapidly degrades the accuracy of the detected waves. He was fascinated as I explained in detail some basic principles of physics. At the end of my discourse, he said, “Case dismissed.”

Both the American judicial system and the Australian judicial system are based on the English system, which has long been recognized for its fairness. Integral to a fair justice system is the opportunity for the accused to present their case to an impartial judge or jury, with an opportunity to appeal the judgment. Because there are a limited number of courts and personnel, our judicial system can be somewhat cumbersome and time consuming, but it generally works.





HOW MANY LAWYERS DOES IT TAKE TO …?


As a neurosurgeon, I have had many opportunities to participate in courtroom proceedings involving medical malpractice claims. Fortunately, all of these appearances so far have been as an expert witness — primarily for the defendants — but in a few egregious cases, for the plaintiffs. Much of our time during these trials is spent trying to educate the jury about things most of them have very little knowledge about. Unfortunately, in many such cases, the outcome of the trial depends more on who establishes the best rapport with the jury and puts on the best dog and pony show rather than who has the facts on their side.

I simply do not have time to be an expert witness anymore, but two decades ago I served as one for a local neurosurgeon who had experienced a bad outcome with a spinal cord tumor. The defense attorneys warned me that the plaintiff had hired Dr. Harvey Wachsman as their chief attorney, and that he was very tough on opposing expert witnesses. Not only was he trained as an attorney, he had also trained as a neurosurgeon and he was president of the American Board of Professional Liability Attorneys. I was familiar with his name because he had done some presentations at national meetings of neurosurgeons on how to avoid getting to know people like him in court. I must admit he was quite an imposing figure, exuding an air of confidence. As an expert witness, I try to be very cooperative, accommodating, and pleasant to the opposing attorneys, while gradually moving them into a position where I can expose the folly of their argument before the jury. It turns out that Dr. Wachsman used much the same approach initially with his witnesses. There I was trying to lead him into a certain position, which would allow me to spring the trap, and he was doing the exact same thing to me. We quickly recognized what each other was doing, and we were having a fabulous time with our chess match.

After the case was over, we were talking in the hallway and discovered that we had many common interests, as well as children who were similar in age. That was the beginning of a long and close friendship and many interesting discussions about medical malpractice. One of the things I admire about Dr. Wachsman and about my own personal attorney, Roger Bennett, is that they would never accept a case that was without merit, even if they thought it could be settled, resulting in a nice fee for themselves. If all plaintiff’s attorneys behaved in that manner, our judicial system would be much less congested, our society would be much less litigious, and the court’s time would be utilized more efficiently, preventing another level of waste. Unfortunately, we have an overabundance of lawyers — all of whom need to make a living — and so we can expect to have excessive litigation in our society for a long time to come. I hope at some point the legal establishment will recognize the problem and attempt to regulate the number of attorneys produced. If they do not, society at large will have to produce a solution.

The English system does not have the same kind of problem with excessive litigation because they have a “loser pay” arrangement. In that system, if you bring a lawsuit against someone and you lose, you have to pay all court costs and fees associated with the lawsuit — on both sides. In our system, most medical malpractice lawsuits are engaged on a contingency basis, which means the plaintiff has no out-of-pocket expenses, even if the case is lost. It’s basically like playing the lottery; you have very little to lose, and you might become a millionaire if you instigate a medical malpractice lawsuit. Whether we add a “loser pay” arrangement to our legal system or devise another solution, the plaintiffs should have some skin in the game. To be able to bring lawsuits against people with no risk to yourself is antithetical to a harmonious and fair society. Unjustly accusing someone is also libel, but by the time a countersuit against the initiator of the first lawsuit is complete, the damage has already been done to the medical practitioner, who has lost their reputation whether they are ultimately proved innocent or not.

Another consequence of having too many lawyers and administrative personnel is the proliferation of red tape and regulations surrounding almost everything in our lives. Lawyers and administrators are not bad people, but they tend to regulate things because that’s what they’re trained to do. If you have too many lawyers, overregulation naturally follows. Over the years, I have had an opportunity to deal with many personnel issues at the hospital, in the corporate world, and in the nonprofit world. I have observed how difficult it is to get rid of someone who is not performing their job well because employers fear a lawsuit for unjust termination. You will have to look far and wide to find someone who is more patient and understanding than I am when it comes to giving people a chance to prove themselves, but incompetence and lack of ethical behavior clearly exists in our society, and when allowed to go unchecked, the morale of others is damaged and the result is inefficiency, and in some cases, even a danger to others.

Are there some commonsense approaches to dealing with things such as unfortunate medical outcomes or job termination? Some will be quick to dismiss this question, saying that without protective regulations and threats of lawsuits, discrimination and bias by employers would reign supreme in the workplaces of America. This, of course, assumes that we have not matured at all from the days of segregation and Jim Crowism, which is a huge and probably inappropriate assumption. One must also bear in mind that media scrutiny and bad publicity are huge deterrents of abusive behavior today compared to decades ago. If we continue to sue and regulate for every possibility, however, soon the level of distrust and suspicion throughout our society will begin to provide a real challenge to healthy interpersonal relationships. I believe it is possible to change the atmosphere of antagonism to one that is friendly and oriented toward the resolution of problems if we can find a way to make litigation the last solution rather than the first.





WHO CONTROLS THOSE WHO CONTROL US?


A great deal of bureaucracy has been added to our government in order to control corruption, but what about corruption in the government — how do we control that? I am aware of numerous patriotic, humanitarian Americans who have been severely abused by components of our justice system, including one of my closest friends.

His parents immigrated to America from Italy and were extremely hard-working, salt-of-the-earth-type people. During the race riots in the late 1960s, their pizza shop was actually protected by rioters when everything else was being looted or burned, because of the respect with which they were held in the community.

He was trained as an oral surgeon and had a thriving practice, but in 1992 he bought a building for $275,000, renovated it, and six months later it was valued at $1 million. Realizing his talent for real estate development, he quickly became one of the most successful developers in his state and went on to complete successful projects in several other states.

My friend has the most wonderful family with a loving and caring wife and extremely bright children, all of whom have stellar academic credentials and not the slightest hint of being spoiled rich kids. In fact, all of their children have been heavily involved in programs to assist poor families. Our families have vacationed together for years, including spending Christmas together. We have such similar values and principles that our bonding was natural.

As his real estate business increased, the available time he had for practicing oral surgery decreased, and he sold his practice to a colleague. Unfortunately, that colleague was later accused of Medicare fraud, but he did not have deep pockets — so the investigating agents came after my friend, even though he no longer owned the practice. They meticulously examined fifteen years of his practice records for evidence of fraud and were only able to uncover two questionable bills, amounting to a total of $180. My friend owns a spectacular home, a Manhattan penthouse, two Ferraris, and a European villa. However, given the fortune he amassed, he lives modestly compared to the lifestyle he could have had if he so desired. I believe the lead agent was either jealous of his success or incorrectly concluded that he had organized crime connections that produced his wealth.

Even though they were unable to uncover any fraud in his record, he was told that they would take him to trial as a co-defendant with the buyer of the practice and would convince jurors that he had knowledge or turned a “blind eye” to the other doctor’s activity. And that eventually he would end up in federal prison if he did not plead guilty to a federal offense in connection with the $180 discrepancy. Not wanting to put his family through so much trauma, he accepted their deal and was sentenced to a one-year house arrest and a $300,000 fine. I am convinced that the judge in the case knew my friend was innocent, and at sentencing made a point of saying “none” of his net worth and success in real estate had any connection to this case, and that he was confused. The result of all of this is that an outstanding American citizen who did everything by the book — who is one of the most ethical people I know and an extremely generous humanitarian — is now a felon who cannot vote. He is giving serious consideration to moving to another country.

I know of other examples of severe government abuses, but I don’t want to give the impression that I think government is bad for us. We must, however, find a way to control excessive and inappropriate government intrusion into the lives of innocent, law-abiding citizens who currently have little or no defense against a bully that is supposed to protect us.





HOW REASONABLE ARE OUR FREEDOMS?


Recently, the United States Department of Justice decided to defend a Muslim teacher in Chicago who had less than one year of seniority and wanted to take off three weeks in the middle of the school term to participate in a religious activity. She was denied the time off but decided to take it anyway and was consequently fired. The lawsuit alleged that the school violated her right to freedom of religion.

This is a complex case with many legal nuances, and I certainly believe that freedom of religion is one of the important founding principles of our nation. However, making reasonable accommodations for one’s religious beliefs should be just that — reasonable! In this case, the religious requirement could have been satisfied at any time during one’s life, which means the teacher could have worked long enough to accumulate adequate time off and could have arranged far in advance for adequate coverage of her absence during the school term. Again, this is simply applying common sense, which seems to be rapidly disappearing from our society. Far too often, instead of looking for reasoned, rational approaches to our problems, we play the race card or the religion card or some other card in an attempt to evoke an emotional response. Have we become a nation moved more by emotion than logic when it comes to our governance and legal judgments? In this case, by forcing the school system to accommodate this teacher’s demand for special treatment to accommodate her religious beliefs, the Justice Department has created a slippery slope with no end to subsequent requests by others for special treatment.

This is an important case, because not only do the rights of the teacher have to be considered, but if one wishes to be fair, the rights of the children being taught and the rights of the school who planned on having a teacher for the entire school year have to be considered. I understand the attorney general’s desire to make sure that the teacher’s rights are not trampled, but if our government is to be successful, it cannot have a myopic view of cases with such profound ramifications.

That same myopic view by our Justice Department resulted in the dismissal of three of the defendants in a voter intimidation case against the new Black Panther party in Philadelphia. The case was widely publicized because the incident was captured on film and distributed on YouTube, showing them verbally abusing voters and brandishing weapons. Would the Justice Department recognize such activity as voter intimidation if the perpetrators wore white sheets and burned crosses? I have a feeling that we may find out the answer to that question sooner rather than later if we continue to tolerate legal myopia justified by emotionally based, politically correct prejudices.

I am not accusing anyone of anything other than failing to look at the big picture when dealing with important legal matters. Some will say that I am advocating a conservative approach to the two cases we just discussed, but I would strongly disagree and would say that this is neither a conservative nor liberal view, but rather a practical and logical one. If we can just tone down the rhetoric and discuss things like rational human beings, applying justice equally and not based on some political philosophy, we will validate that phrase at the end of our Pledge of Allegiance, which advocates “justice for all.”





LIBERTY FOR ALL — AND PRIVACY FOR SOME


We could write an entire book on the concept of “liberty for all” found in our Pledge of Allegiance, but I will concentrate on one related problem that threatens to severely derail our entire system of government. We frequently hear the question, why do many of the brightest and most accomplished people in our society refuse to run for public office? The answer is simple; they do not enter political contests because they know that their lives will be scrutinized and privacy and consideration for their family will be nonexistent. If some unsavory incident from the person’s past is uncovered — or even suspected in the case of someone that the biased media does not like — a feeding frenzy occurs.

I do not believe this was the result our forefathers envisioned when they fought so hard to establish freedom of the press. Such freedom should be coupled with common decency and not serve as a license to be obnoxious and inconsiderate of fellow citizens one disagrees with politically. I do not believe that the press should be restricted, but it would be very helpful if our leaders would provide consistent commentary about the role of the press in politics. It is quite immature to favor the press that agrees with a leader’s political philosophies and shun the press that is critical of a leader’s positions.

Everyone has made mistakes in the past that they would prefer to keep private. If criminal activity went unpunished or there is a character defect relevant to the public position being sought, full disclosure and discussion is warranted, but if — as in most cases — it is just a juicy tidbit, the media should resist the urge to exploit it and concentrate on issues relevant to the job. I personally would be skeptical of someone who had never made mistakes, because they would probably have difficulty identifying with the rest of us. I realize that I’m asking a lot of the media, who now have twenty-four-hour news cycles and have to find a way to fill the time. There are numerous positive and uplifting stories about incredible people in this nation and throughout the world that could easily fill the time and provide inspiration. By the same token, it is totally irresponsible for the media to ignore glaring warning signs from a candidate’s past just because they agree with his political philosophy. We should certainly not be surprised, however, when our children are mean and unfair to one another if we continue to provide them with such examples of hostility toward those with whom we disagree.





SHOWING KINDNESS TO THE POOR


When it comes to liberty and justice for all, the Bible makes it clear that we have a responsibility to be kind to the poor among us. As the famous old Chinese proverb points out, it is better to teach a poor man how to fish than to give him a fish. America did not become a great nation by encouraging people to feel sorry for themselves and seek handouts from others.

If we really want to eradicate poverty, we should allocate significant resources and personnel toward providing education and opportunity for the poor. And if we are to provide assistance to our able-bodied citizens, it should be attached to a requirement for work or acquisition of education and/or skills. Not only will this improve self-esteem, it will prepare those individuals to participate in an increasingly sophisticated workforce. Work projects could also contribute to the maintenance of our national infrastructure and beautification, if the right kinds of jobs are assigned as a requirement for benefits.

If they have to work anyway, many people will put real effort into finding the kind of job they want as opposed to collecting unemployment benefits and being assigned to work they consider undesirable. Some conservatives would say that we should leave such people on their own to sink or swim because we cannot afford to keep supporting them, while some liberals would say that these people already have enough problems and that it would be unfair to require anything of them that would add to their stress. I reject both of those positions and simply say the application of logic once again will prove most helpful in the long run to our fellow citizens experiencing financial misfortune.





IN FAIRNESS TO ALL


Every citizen of the United States should be expected to contribute to its welfare, which requires a fair system of taxation. We currently do not have such a system, because our tax code is so complex that those with good tax attorneys or accountants can find numerous loopholes to avoid paying their fair share of taxes. For instance, one well-known celebrity owns a very expensive mansion on a large piece of property in the Northeast, but pays very little in the way of property taxes because he raises honey bees on the property, which provides a little-known but gigantic tax benefit. I could go on for hours with similar examples, but the point is that given our country’s financial crisis, the creation of a new and fairer tax system is urgently needed. The cries of “tax the rich” in the face of such a hypocritical tax code is, frankly, quite laughable. I do not believe that the rich are unpatriotic because they take advantage of loopholes, but I think we as a nation are smart enough to come up with a system of taxation that eliminates the need for slick accountants and lawyers, and that allows everyone to contribute proportionately to the financial health of the nation — just as God designed for us in the concept of the tithe.

Although I have pointed out many problems that we currently face as a nation, I have also made it clear that the principles upon which our government was founded are solid. In order to take advantage of the ingenious document known as the United States Constitution, we need outstanding, nonpartisan leadership with a vision that can unite the various political factions into a positive driving force, inspiring us and creating an atmosphere in which liberty and justice do flourish, allowing all to succeed.





— CHAPTER 13 —





WHAT’S GOOD

ABOUT AMERICA?


IT IS A TESTIMONY TO ALL that is good about America and the opportunities available here that a friend of mine was able to start out as a short order cook in a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant and, from there, through hard work and carefully observing the values that lead to success, established his own national chain of fast-food restaurants. As with any good rags-to-riches story, however, his life wasn’t always easy.

Born to an unwed mother he never knew, he was adopted after six weeks. His adoptive mother died when he was five, and his father went in search of work around the country. From his family, my friend learned the value of hard work and perseverance, and in his early thirties, this young entrepreneur was given the opportunity to use his restaurant experience to take over four Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants in need of help in Columbus, Ohio. He was able to completely turn around those restaurants, and four years later he sold them back to KFC, making approximately $1.5 million. That was just the beginning of his success, as he went on to found his own national fast-food chain.

“Only in America,” he was once quoted as saying, “would a guy like me, from humble beginnings and without a high school diploma, become successful. America gave me a chance to live the life I want and work to make my dreams come true. We should never take our freedoms for granted, and we should seize every opportunity presented to us.”1

His name of course is Dave Thomas, the founder of Wendy’s, and my wife and I were among his first houseguests after he built his dream home in Fort Lauderdale prior to suffering a fatal heart attack. The effect that he has had on America has been overwhelmingly positive. Adopted himself, he went on to found the “Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption.” He claims his decision to drop out of high school was his biggest regret, and so not only did he go on to get his GED at around age sixty, he started the Dave Thomas Education Center to help other adults complete their GED.

Dave Thomas’s success is not rare in our country because of the freedoms we enjoy, and like him and so many others, I am incredibly thankful to call America home. I have been privileged to travel the world and visit all of its major societies, but to be born in a land of opportunity for anyone willing to work hard is an unfathomable blessing that should never be taken for granted. As I learned growing up, even with all the economic turmoil that surrounds us today, entrepreneurial opportunities still exist for anyone who is willing to work hard and think innovatively.

The more stories I read about the success of people who applied themselves to make their lives better, the more motivated I am to be one of them. Knowledge really is power, and when I became a voracious reader, my confidence and grades improved accordingly. I needed little in the way of pep talks by adults, and today it is my strong belief that if you can just get children to believe in themselves and understand that when they achieve academically, they are the ultimate beneficiaries, they will do what is necessary to become a successful contributor rather than a drain on society.

God has opened many doors of opportunity throughout my lifetime, but I believe the greatest of those doors was allowing me to be born in the United States of America.





STEADY AS SHE GOES IN A SEA OF

WORLDWIDE TROUBLE


Growing up, I heard many complaints from those around me about poverty, but visiting such places as India, Egypt, and Africa has provided me with perspective on what poverty really is. Hundreds of millions, if not billions, of people in the world live on less than two dollars a day. Many of those living in poverty in this country, in fact, would be considered quite wealthy by poor people in other countries. Also, here in the US, there is no caste system to determine one’s social status, so there are many opportunities for people to escape poverty without resorting to a life of crime. You are much more likely to be judged in this nation by your knowledge and the way you express yourself than you are by your pedigree. I’m not sure we realize how good we have it on this point.

As I mentioned earlier in the book, racial identity has also become significantly less important in many segments of American society today, which is quite astonishing considering how strong racism was when I was a child. Considering the fact that prejudice is borne out of ignorance, I feel very optimistic about the future of race relations and diversity in America — something that in many countries around the world is worsening. This land was originally occupied by Native Americans, who were largely destroyed by European diseases to which they had no immunity. Hispanic populations then became the majority, followed by people of European ancestry. If you throw in the effects of slavery, East Indian and Asian immigration, and our lack of southern border controls today, you have a formula for perhaps the greatest human diversity on earth right here in the United States. That diversity, however, is a strength, because every group brings its own particular set of strengths to the table, and all have made very substantial contributions to the growth and development of our country. It is essential that we recognize these differences as the blessings they are.

When you look around the world — particularly at the Middle East right now — violent political turmoil is everywhere. Regime change in other parts of the world is often accompanied by bloodshed and severe upheaval. In 2008, our country experienced a radical political change of direction without firing a single bullet or taking a single prisoner. The ability to make such monumental changes without civil war is a mighty testament not only to our founders, but also to our current political leaders in all parties. If, in the future, our political leaders begin advocating violence to get their way, we should abandon them in droves and do everything possible to diminish their influence. Our system of representative government allows the people to periodically dismiss those elected officials who no longer represent their views. It is perhaps the most important civic duty of every citizen to inform themselves about the issues of the day and cast educated votes for people who truly represent their views. One should never vote for someone simply because they recognize their name or because of party designation. It is better to vote for no one at all than to cast an arbitrary vote. If all citizens take this duty seriously, there will be far less chance of our lifestyle and that of our children being hijacked by smooth-talking politicians.





FREEDOM TO MIND OUR OWN BUSINESS


Have you ever thought about how fortunate we are to have the right to privacy in such a technologically advanced society? Since 9/11 it has become increasingly important to monitor all suspicious activity in an attempt to prevent further terrorist attacks. One of the results of this monitoring has been the discovery of some unsavory habits and characteristics of many otherwise outstanding citizens. To its credit, our government has not disclosed those findings or prosecuted the involved individuals because we still respect the right of all of our citizens to privacy as long as they are not infringing upon the rights of others. I realize that many “holier than thou” conservatives and even some liberals think we should use all gathered information about people they don’t care for, to discredit them. If and when this begins to happen, our country will become a nightmare akin to George Orwell’s novel 1984. We must jealously guard every American citizen’s right to live as they please, again as long as they are not interfering with the rights of other Americans to do the same.

As a Bible-believing Christian, you might imagine that I would not be a proponent of gay marriage. I believe God loves homosexuals as much as he loves everyone, but if we can redefine marriage as between two men or two women or any other way based on social pressures as opposed to between a man and a woman, we will continue to redefine it in any way that we wish, which is a slippery slope with a disastrous ending, as witnessed in the dramatic fall of the Roman Empire. I don’t believe this to be a political view, but rather a logical and reasoned view with long-term benefits to family structure and the propagation of humankind. When children grow up in an environment with loving parents who provide security, they are free to be happy and playful and eager to learn. God obviously knew what he was doing when he ordained the traditional family, and we should not denigrate it in order to uplift some alternative.

However, I have no problem whatsoever with allowing gay people to live as they please, as long as they don’t try to impose their lifestyle on everyone else. Marriage is a very sacred institution and should not be degraded by allowing every other type of relationship to be made equivalent to it. If gays or non-gays wish to have some type of legal binding relationship that helps with the adjudication of property rights and other legal matters, I certainly have no problem with that, but to equate that with marriage is going further than necessary. Likewise, I have no problem with Muslims or other religious groups who want to practice their religion in their homes, which may be vastly different from traditional Judeo-Christian religion, as long as they don’t try to impose that on others or violate our laws. I could go on with other examples for quite some time, but I hope I have conveyed the wonderful freedom we enjoy as citizens of a government that protects the right to privacy.

I was recently watching a National Geographic special about baboons, and one of the things that shocked me was the fact that dominant female baboons who lose their babies often forcibly abduct the babies of subordinate females. Unfortunately, in many societies around the world, the strong prey upon the weak like this. I am not naïve enough to believe that the same thing would not happen in our country if our police and military, backed by a moral government, were not available at a moment’s notice to stop such barbarous activity. We take for granted our ability to accumulate material goods and have them protected by the government, but this is by no means a universal right.

I have lived the vast majority of my life in the state of Maryland, but it is a wonderful feeling to know that I can move to Texas next week or Alaska or Hawaii or anyplace else I decide to live. Not only can I choose in which state I want to reside, but I don’t have to learn a new language or new customs. There are many parts of the world where chronic unemployment is the rule rather than the exception, and if I am unemployed and a new factory with thousands of job openings is announced in Idaho, I can quickly move there to take advantage of that opportunity. This means that if my priority is having a job rather than enjoying a location, I can almost always have a job. In my lifetime, I have held numerous jobs, from high school and college laboratory assistant to bank teller, to mailroom clerk, to assembly line worker, to radiology technician, to encyclopedia salesman, to student policeman, to Hollywood extra. Through all of these jobs, I have acquired knowledge and different skills, which are all very helpful to me today. In many societies, a person is pigeonholed into a single track, and basically has to spend their entire life working in that particular area. Here in the United States, however, we can go anywhere we want, take any job offered to us, and pursue the occupation of our choosing.

I also feel blessed to live in a country where I can openly choose and express my faith without fear of persecution. There are several places in the world today where conversion to Christianity will result in persecution or even execution. It is very sad that civilization has not advanced in some parts of the world to the point of being able to tolerate different ideas. In this country, we must guard against a tendency to require monolithic thought as imposed by political correctness. This is an insidious evil that robs people of their God-given desire to think for themselves. It is tyrannical and cruel, not even sparing young children in school. We must never forget that our nation was founded by people trying to escape religious intolerance and tyranny. Whenever we see these monsters raising their heads we should quickly slay them again.





OUR NATION’S CUP RUNS OVER


When disasters occur in other countries, who is first on the scene with massive aid? The United States, of course. It does not matter whether the mishap befalls a friend or an enemy, we are always there. It doesn’t matter whether it’s a very poor country such as Haiti or a very rich country such as Japan, we are still always there. Our compassion for and aid to other countries is unprecedented in the history of the world. Our compassion extends not only to food and material help during natural disasters, but during the recent Libyan civil war, we joined a multinational effort to prevent mass slaughter of the insurgents. Whether we can continue to be so generous in face of massive budgetary deficits remains to be seen, but we can certainly take pride in the historical humanitarian efforts of our nation.

When I was eight years old, I told my mother that I wanted to be a doctor.

“Benny,” she said, “you can be anything in this world you want to be.”

Although it was an arduous road filled with obstacles and grueling hours, I was able to realize my dream because of the generous freedoms we enjoy here in our nation. It is this ability of anyone to achieve their dreams that is perhaps the greatest thing about America.

There are few places in the world where people enjoy the level of freedom we have in America. Here you don’t have to ask anyone’s permission to start a new career or move to a new location. You are free to associate with whomever you please, and you are free to speak your mind if you decide not to allow yourself to be constrained by political correctness. If you have a fabulous idea, you are free to put as much time and effort into it as you like, and if that idea results in a financial windfall, you are entitled to spend your money to your heart’s desire — after you have paid your taxes, of course. You can worship however you choose without fear of persecution. Even the poorest people in our society live like kings compared to billions of desperately poor people throughout the world.

Why do we enjoy all of these and many more blessings? It is largely because we have a representative government that respects the rights of its citizens and protects the life and property of its citizens, and because we have a military powerful enough to defend us against intruders. It is because we have a free market economy that, when unfettered, acts as an economic engine more powerful than any the world has ever seen. Most importantly, we have a nation of faith so bold that we are willing to proclaim “In God We Trust” on every coin in our pockets and every bill in our wallets. We have enjoyed the blessings of the Almighty from the time when he aided a fledgling group of militiamen in defeating the most powerful empire on earth up until the present, as he protects us from unimaginable terrorist threats. There never has been and probably never will be again another place like America the Beautiful.





— CHAPTER 14 —





WHAT DO WE BELIEVE

AND IN WHOM DO

WE TRUST?


A SUCCESSFUL YOUNG BUSINESSMAN loved to buy exotic gifts for his mother on Mother’s Day, but he was running out of ideas one year when he encountered some amazing birds with the ability to dance, sing, and talk. He was so happy that he purchased two of them and couldn’t wait to ship them off to his mother. On Mother’s Day, he called her excitedly and asked, “Mother, what did you think of those birds?”

“Mmm,” she answered, “they were good.”

“Mother, you didn’t eat those birds!” he said, unable to contain his shock. “Those birds cost five thousand dollars apiece. They could dance, they could sing, and they could talk!”

“Well,” she calmly replied, “then they should’ve said something.”

This funny story points out how important it is for us to speak up when confronted with danger. If we see our freedoms eroding around us and are afraid to stand up for what we value, we too will ultimately end up in the stew like those birds. Most Germans did not agree with Hitler’s insane agenda, but their collective silence permitted an unimaginable human tragedy that stained world history known as the Holocaust. How might their nation’s history and our world’s history have played out differently if those who saw what was happening had taken a stand for what they believed?

When rights and freedoms are not exercised, they become meaningless. If America is to remain the land of the free and home of the brave, we must have the courage to say what we mean unequivocally. If we allow our speech to be stifled by the PC police, we will be unable to have honest conversations in the struggle to resolve political differences. The founders of this nation were well aware of what happens when free speech is stifled.

Of all the wonderful freedoms that characterize life here in America, freedom of speech is one of the most important. This was most dramatically demonstrated in a recent Supreme Court decision, which upheld the rights of members of the Westboro Baptist Church to display extremely offensive signs and shout obscenities during funeral services for veterans. They are an intolerant hate group that despises homosexuality and are angry with the military because gays are allowed to serve. There is almost no one who agrees with the Westboro Church, but because of the Supreme Court’s decision to strictly interpret the Constitution, the rights of the church members could not be denied. Can you imagine how quickly this group would be executed in many other countries for doing such a thing, but ironically the very military they are criticizing provides them with the freedom to be so obnoxious.

I actually have some doubts about that legal decision, because the signs, obscenity, and noise infringe upon the rights of other Americans to assemble peacefully for the burial of one of their loved ones. If my right to free speech causes you actual harm, it becomes time to curtail my speech. (Obviously the preferable option would be for me to care enough about you not to hurt you by exercising my rights.) But interestingly, as a society we go to great lengths to protect the legal rights of fringe elements while at the same time imposing massive social restrictions on speech through political correctness. The real question is, will we as Americans, accustomed to freedom, continue to sheepishly submit to the purveyors of political correctness without recognizing its erosive effects on our freedom?

What each one of us says and does — and what our actions are collectively as a nation — is born out of what we believe. But if we never act on our beliefs, can we say that we truly value them? Can we say that we truly believe? And if we do believe enough to act, what is it that we as a nation feel passionately enough to sacrifice for? In other words, what is it that we stand for?





TRUE COLORS: OUR FLAG


A symbol points to a reality beyond itself — a wedding ring representing the circle of unending, unconditional love between a husband and wife, for example, or the Christian cross turning the ancient Roman instrument of humiliation and torture into a symbol for the abundant life found through the sacrificial death of Christ. Symbolism abounds when it comes to our United States government, but I’d like to look at three important ones, beginning with our flag.

Few things give me greater joy than watching color guards marching into an assembly with our country’s distinctive flag held high. Everyone knows that there are thirteen stripes to represent the original thirteen colonies and fifty stars, each representing one of the fifty states. But what you may not know is that red represents hardness and valor. White represents purity and innocence. And blue represents perseverance, vigilance, and justice.1 One of the largest American flags ever constructed was at the behest of General Armistead during the War of 1812. The British Royal Navy had launched a fierce bombardment on Baltimore’s Fort McHenry, and they clearly had the upper hand. Their capture of Baltimore, which seemed imminent, would solidify a series of victories that had included massive destruction in Washington, DC, including the White House. The commander of the British fleet had sent word to the Americans at Fort McHenry that he did not want to utterly destroy them and that he would cease bombing them as soon as they lowered the American flag in surrender.

Francis Scott Key was an amateur poet on an official government mission approved by President James Madison to try to rescue some captives being held by the British. Key was being held on one of the British ships engaged in the battle since he had overheard some of the war strategy and the British did not want him to tip off the Americans. His heart was broken as he heard the British missiles streaming through the air, destroying one of the last American bastions of safety. There was so much smoke and debris from the fighting that he was unable to determine whether the flag was still flying until early the next day, when “by the dawn’s early light” he witnessed the most beautiful sight he had ever seen: the torn and tattered stars and stripes of our flag, still proudly waving. Many historians feel that America’s ability to repel that fierce attack was the turning point in the War of 1812, which eventually led to our triumph.

Every time I see our magnificent Stars and Stripes, I think of the fortitude of those Americans at Fort McHenry who, although outnumbered and outgunned, never allowed that flag to lower in surrender. That should remind us of who we are: a people who never surrender, who never give up, who are historically rooted in a faith in God rather than in the vicissitudes of man, who believe in freedom, and who would rather die than abandon our beliefs in equality and justice for everyone.





FLYING HIGH: THE EAGLE


Another of our proud symbols is the bald eagle. Some wanted a turkey as our national emblem, while others favored the golden eagle, but after much deliberation, the bald eagle was chosen because it symbolizes strength, courage, and freedom.

In The 5000 Year Leap, W. Cleon Skousen writes that the founders had many other symbolic reasons for choosing the eagle. But the reason that impressed me most is that in order for the eagle to fly straight, its two wings must be balanced. If either the left wing or the right wing is too heavy, the bird will veer off to one side and crash. The liberals represent the left wing and the conservatives represent the right wing. The liberals tend to have lots of great ideas that cost a great deal of money and, if left unchecked, would quickly bankrupt the nation. The conservatives simply want to maintain the status quo and are not very adventurous, and if our nation were left solely to their ideas, stagnation would occur. However, when you balance the right and left wings evenly, the eagle is able to fly high and straight, and the potential for progress is tremendous. Of course this is an oversimplification, and currently the conservative wing is putting forth some fairly bold ideas about how to maintain the fiscal responsibility of a nation, but ultimately that means they are trying to conserve the American dream for future generations.

As a nation, we need to understand that there are valid functions for people of all political persuasions. No party has a monopoly on truth and justice. What is called for is mutual respect and a willingness to make decisions based on facts and empirical data rather than philosophical tenets. If we can remember these things, then the majestic nature symbolized by the bald eagle will be a rightful representation of our wise nation.





OUR STATUE OF LIBERTY: WATCHING OVER

THOSE YEARNING TO BREATHE FREE


When I was in high school, I determined to learn as much as I possibly could about everything. When I began studying European art and classical music, however, I received a significant amount of criticism from classmates. Some told me that those areas were not culturally relevant to me as an African-American. But if the United States of America is the diverse conglomeration of people from all kinds of cultural and ethnic backgrounds, what does the term culturally relevant mean to its citizens?

To answer that question, take a trip to Ellis Island, the resting place of our Statue of Liberty, which has become a widely recognized symbol of freedom and opportunity throughout the world. Walk through the museum where pictures of immigrants from every part of the world are displayed on the walls. Look at the determination in their eyes, many of whom brought to this country only what they could carry in their hands. These people were willing to work not just eight hours a day, but twelve, sixteen, or even twenty hours a day. They worked not five days a week, but six or even seven days to make their way in the “New World.” At that time, there was no such thing as a minimum wage, but they didn’t care. They were not working for themselves, but rather to provide an opportunity for their sons and daughters, grandsons and granddaughters, to prosper in this new land. It is the hard work of all those people from all those places that is culturally relevant to every American.

Long before the Statue of Liberty landed in America, however, other immigrants came here in the bottom of slave ships who worked even harder for no wages, but they too had a dream that one day their great-grandsons and great-granddaughters might pursue freedom and prosperity in this land.

Of all the nations in the world, the United States of America was the only one big enough and great enough to allow all those people from all those backgrounds to fulfill their dreams. It required the dreams and talents of all those people to create the quilt that is America. Every single one of us is culturally relevant to every other one of us — and that is why we are called the United States of America! Is the rapid rise of the United States really all that amazing considering the unprecedented freedom its citizens had? When citizens and, indeed, entire communities recognized that they would be the primary beneficiaries of their own hard work, there was no stopping them. It’s like giving someone access to a vault full of money with two different scenarios. In the first instance, they are told that they can have the vast majority of the money that they are able to carry out over the next ten hours. In the second instance, they are told to work on behalf of the overseer who will make sure that they are treated fairly. Which scenario do you think will generate the greatest intensity of work? That’s a no-brainer, of course, and until recent decades, it was a no-brainer that hard work and innovation here could vastly improve your personal circumstances and those of your family. This belief was and should continue to be a basic part of the American dream. If you truly believe this, you should resist any attempts to establish the government as your overseer rather than your facilitator. It was no accident that this philosophy accelerated the rise of America. If we abandon it — even by accident because we are sleeping — our fall will be just as rapid as was our rise.





IN WHOM DO WE TRUST?


Traditionally, America has been a God-fearing nation. Evidence of that can be found in our mottos, in many of our songs, in many of our national documents, and carved into many monuments and buildings.2 It has traditionally distinguished us from many other nations of the world, and it is one of the reasons we are always first in line when it comes to humanitarian aid for others. It is also why we have not used our great might to conquer other nations of the world. We pay attention to the issues of morality and ethics because our nation was founded on principles revealed to us in the Bible by a righteous and just God.

Have you ever stopped to think about what money represents? It represents wealth and power. As we have recently seen, when you lack money and incur great debt, your influence and power decrease. Considering what your money says about you, it is really quite amazing that our nation has chosen to inscribe the phrase “In God We Trust” on all of our money. By doing so, we proclaim to the world that godly principles are essential to our way of life, that we trust not in our money, not in the power that comes from having money — but in our God. Having declared that for the world to see, it is essential that we allow our lives to speak as loudly as our money.

We have been favored by God because we have acknowledged him, but as the forces of political correctness attempt to push God out of our lives, we must have courage to resist them. That does not mean that we should retaliate or manifest the same intolerance they have shown. It does mean, however, that we must stand up and be counted. If they do not wish to accept the godly principles that we choose to live by, we should make no attempt to force them, but by no stretch of the imagination should we allow them to force their beliefs on us. For the God in whom we place our trust has entrusted each one of us with the freedom to choose our beliefs — as well as the mind to speak up for what we believe to be right.





COMPROMISE, OPINION, AND PRINCIPLES


The word compromise was referred to frequently during the debate in early 2011 about the national budget and again that summer in the debate about raising the debt ceiling. In general, compromise is good when dealing with issues about which there are legitimate differences of opinion. A problem arises, however, with the compromise of principles.

For example, if one believes that killing is wrong in all instances, be it executing a mass murderer or aborting an unborn fetus, it will be very difficult to negotiate a compromise on the issues of capital punishment or abortion. If, on the other hand, an individual is opposed to capital punishment simply because of the great expense involved in each case, and only opposed to late-term abortion, that person would be quite capable of yielding to compromise.

As a nation, we need to spend more time understanding who we are and what those principles are that define us. Once we identify them, there should be no apology and no compromise in applying them. However, on less vital issues, it is important to recognize that we are all in the same boat and will reach our destination much faster if we row the boat together. Our elected leaders need to spend much more time understanding the values and principles that made us into a great nation, and much less time worrying about what their party platform has on its agenda. More importantly, the people who select the leaders must recognize that they ultimately are responsible for what is happening in the country. If they don’t like it, they need to select different leaders. Each citizen should put at least as much effort into selecting their representatives as they do into buying a new car.

I live in a small town in rural Maryland, and I must say it is a very pleasant place to live. People still speak to those they don’t know and are still willing to help someone in need. There was a time in America when people made a much greater effort to be neighborly. Now it is common for people to not even know their neighbors. People walk by others in their workplace who have been there for years and don’t even acknowledge their presence. News commentators, political pundits, and public officials verbally savage those with whom they disagree and demonize their motives. This is all very sad to me because it seems that as time goes on, we should be becoming more civilized rather than less so. There is absolutely no moral justification for adults to spend valuable time disparaging their political opponents rather than delving into logical solutions for the problems that face us all. They, of course, justify it by their need to be re-elected. How can we blame children for bullying and trash talk when we provide them with such excellent examples of how to go about doing it?

I remember how much fun people in my high school had when they made fun of others. The people with the sharpest tongues were accorded the most honor and respect. It was only after I learned how to be verbally abusive to others that I was accepted as one of the guys in high school. But we were immature kids with poor judgment and lack of compassion; responsible adults can do much better, even though the temptation is always there to demonize those with whom we disagree.

During the civil rights movement, the media played a tremendous role in changing public perceptions and attitudes with regard to race. If they choose to do so, they could once again play an important role in rectifying the mean-spiritedness that threatens to destroy the harmony and progress of the world’s most powerful nation. However, many people make a great deal of money by polarizing people and cultivating a following. It takes very strong character to resist the urge to denigrate others and create a wise and “all knowing” persona for themselves. I suspect that many in the media are pretty entrenched in their way of doing things and are not going to suddenly play fair. I should also point out that some in the media are real patriots and use humor, sarcasm, hyperbole, and satire in an attempt to awaken people to the realities of the times in which we live. Ultimately, the people still have the power, and just as they can rid themselves of undesirable politicians, they can vote with their money and remote controls, which will always have a powerful impact on the direction our media takes.





THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TOLERANCE

AND ACCOMMODATION


Because of all the conflicting views necessitating compromise in our nation, the difference between tolerance and accommodation is an important one to understand. Principles of fairness and brotherhood should make us tolerant of everyone. We really do not have the right to impose our values and lifestyle on people who have a different point of view. For example, several years ago a fourth-year general surgery resident at a hospital in the Midwest tried to enlist my help because she was being fired for praying with patients before surgery. I asked her if the patients requested prayer and she said no, but she went on to state that they did not refuse to pray with her. I told her that she was abusing her position of power and that she needed to recognize her error and apologize to everyone involved. It is an abuse of power to make people pray just as it is an abuse of power to keep people from praying. Our founding fathers understood this and wisely instituted a policy of separation of church and state, which is totally different from the concept of separation of God and state.

I am happy that people with lifestyles with which I strongly disagree are free to live their lives as they please, as long as their lifestyle does not infringe upon my way of life. Some people, for example, believe in nudity as a way of life. I have no problem with them pursuing that belief in a nudist colony or some other place where young children would not accidentally be exposed to something they were not prepared for. That is tolerance. Accommodation might mean arming all the nudists with whistles, which they would be required to blow every time they rounded a corner in my community so that those not wishing to see them could turn their back or shelter their children.

This is of course an extreme example, but it clearly shows the difference between tolerance and accommodation. As God-fearing people, we should absolutely exercise tolerance, but changing our way of life to accommodate everyone is not only impractical, but it is also very unfair to the existing culture. Again, in order to be fair, we must have a firm grasp of who we are as a people and what is important to us. If we don’t, the forces of political correctness will gradually blur the lines between tolerance and acceptance, to the point that we will soon have no idea who we are or what we stand for. This process has already begun in our nation, and we must recognize it in order to stop it in its tracks.

An example of how political correctness tries to usurp power and impose rules occurred a few years ago when some lawyers approached my wife and me to inform us that our “Think Big” banners could no longer be displayed in public schools. The letter T is for talent, which everyone has to some degree; the letter H is for honesty; I is for insight; N is for nice; K is for knowledge; B is for books; I is for in-depth learning; and G is for God. Because the G stands for God, they felt that was clearly a violation of the establishment clause of the First Amendment. We informed them that the First Amendment prohibits government suppression of religious expression and a rather vigorous argument ensued. I told them that we could resolve this at the level of the Supreme Court, which may have seemed like a bold and reckless statement. It really wasn’t, because I knew that I was going to the Supreme Court the very next week to receive the Jefferson Award, and I figured I would ask Justice Sandra Day O’Connor while I was there. I did, and she said they had no idea what they were talking about, and that of course you could put such a banner in a public school without violating any part of the Constitution. The audacity of some of the secularists who try to get God out of everything with no legitimate legal backing is astonishing, and they must be challenged and their objections defeated if our value system is to survive.





BEING LOGICAL, NOT POLITICAL


By now you might have gotten the idea that I don’t like people who practice political correctness, but that would not be true. Many such people think they are doing what is right and necessary to cultivate a civil society. I do, however, believe they are misguided. Instead of advocating for unanimity of speech and thought, they should be emphasizing learning to respect and be gracious to those with whom they disagree. Think about how boring the world would be if everybody agreed with everything you believed. As I love to say, “If two people believe the same thing about everything, one of them isn’t necessary.”

Many recent polls have shown that most Americans believe that we are on the wrong path as a nation. They are discouraged about our future and the future of our children. I say, be not discouraged, for God is on our side if we really trust in him, as is indicated on every coin in your pocket and every bill in your wallet.

We must stop being political and start being logical. The human brain has gigantic frontal lobes when compared with the brains of all other species. Why do we have these enlarged cerebral areas? The frontal lobes are where rational thought processing takes place, and it is there that information from the past and the present can be processed and integrated into a plan for the future. Unlike most animals, because we are so equipped, we do not have to simply react to our environment. We have the ability to plan and strategize, which allows us a great deal of control over our course in the future.





BUILDING ON OUR SOLID FOUNDATION


I feel blessed to have lived here in America for sixty years, with hopefully many more to come. In all those years, I have never met a perfect person — and since nations are simply collections of imperfect people, I have never seen a perfect nation. In looking back through the history of the world, however, I feel very comfortable in saying that there has never been another nation like the United States of America. Yes, we have made mistakes, but we continue to learn from them, and as long as we remain capable of embracing life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness as our goal, and we are willing to guarantee those things to our citizens, I believe we will continue to grow in greatness.

When our forefathers knelt and prayed for wisdom at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787, then stood up and together assembled a seventeen-page document known as the Constitution of the United States of America, they were clearly guided by the hand of God. Today the forces of political correctness would expel God from every public sphere in American life, and the hearts and minds of every man, woman, and child in America are up for grabs in this cataclysmic battle between the lovers of men and the lovers of God. Some would rather never choose between the two, but life is full of choices, and our individual and collective choices determine the quality of our existence.

I believe it is time for us to stand up and be counted. We can no longer be passive because the Judeo-Christian way of life in America is at stake. We need not be ashamed of our faith, and we certainly should not allow those who believe differently to change who we are in order to be politically correct. Yes, we should accept them with brotherly love as we have been taught, but we should never compromise our belief system. We do believe in God, and we do believe in the right of everyone to have life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. We do believe in an orderly government that facilitates these goals rather than impedes them. It is time to set aside political correctness and replace it with the bold values and principles that founded our nation and caused it to race to the pinnacle of the world faster than any other nation in history. It is time to stop apologizing and to start leading, because the world is desperately in need of fair and ethical leadership. If that leader is not America, then who will it be, and where will they lead?

If we apply logic to solving our problems and add the godly principles of loving our fellow man, caring about our neighbors, and developing our God-given talents to the utmost so we become valuable to those around us — allowing these values and principles to govern our lives — then not only will we remain a pinnacle nation, we will truly be “one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”

It is my prayer, America, that God will continue to shed his grace on thee, and crown thy good with brotherhood from sea to shining sea. I pray that with his blessings our past will be but a stepping stone to a bright future and that our best days will truly lie ahead of us — a beautiful new beginning!





NOTES





CHAPTER 1: AMERICA’S HISTORY OF REBELLING FOR CHANGE


1. If you’re an armchair historian thinking, I have never heard of the Battle of Breed’s Hill, that’s because in the confusion of battle some thought the skirmish took place at nearby Bunker Hill, but the actual fighting took place at Breed’s. In fact, the Battle of Bunker Hill and the Battle of Breed’s Hill are one and the same. Robert V. Remini, A Short History of the United States (New York: HarperCollins, 2008), 38.

2. Larry Schweikart and Michael Allen, A Patriot’s History of the United States (New York: Penguin, 2004), 79.

3. Craig Nelson, Thomas Paine: Enlightenment, Revolution, and the Birth of Modern Nations (New York: Penguin, 2007), 90.





CHAPTER 2: WHO ARE “WE THE PEOPLE”?


1. See 2 Samuel 2:4, 1 Chronicles 29:22, 2 Chronicles 10:16, and Exodus 19:8.

2. Colin Rhys Lovell, English Constitutional and Legal History (New York: Oxford University Press, 1962), 3 – 50.

3. James MacGregor Burns, The Vineyard of Liberty (New York: Knopf, 1982), 33.

4. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-politics/, section 3, chart under subhead “Supplement: Political Naturalism.”

5. Federalist Papers, no. 10, 81.

6. Federalist Papers, no. 39, 241.

7. Federalist Papers, no. 51, February 8, 1788.



8. William J. Federer, America’s God and Country: Encyclopedia of Quotations (St. Louis: Amerisearch, 2000), 458.

9. Federer, America’s God and Country, 453.

10. Kenneth C. Davis, Don’t Know Much about History (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), 118 – 19.

11. Letter to Colonel Edward Carrington (January 16, 1787); see www.wideworldofquotes.com/quotes/thomas-jefferson-quotes.html.

12. Letter to John Jay (August 15, 1786); see www.revolutionary-war-and-beyond.com/george-washington-quotes-9.html.

13. See www.spiegel.de​/international​/europe​/0,1518,677214,00.html; www.marketoracle.co.uk​/Article28957.html; http://​economicsnewspaper.com/​policy/​german/​portugal-ireland-belgium-italy-juncker-fears-contagion–35019.html; www.taipanpublishinggroup.com/​tpg/​taipan-daily/​​taipan-daily–062411.html?sub=TD&o=385937&s=389028&u=48412125&l=275791&g=198&r=Milo.

14. Matthew Spalding, ed., The Founders’ Almanac (Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation, 2008), 203. Excerpted from a letter to Joseph Milligan, April 6, 1816.

15. Notes on the State of Virginia, Query XIV, 1781.





CHAPTER 3: ARE WE A JUDEO-CHRISTIAN NATION OR NOT?


1. Peter Lillback with Jerry Newcombe, George Washington’s Sacred Fire (Bryn Mawr, Penn.: Providence Forum Press, 2006), 485 – 86.

2. Federer, America’s God and Country, 635.

3. Federer, America’s God and Country, 654. National Day of Thanksgiving Proclamation, October 3, 1789.

4. www.petahtikvah.com/Articles/salomon.htm.

5. www.jewishworldreview.com/jewish/salomon.asp.

6. nationaldayofprayer.org/about/history/.

7. www.christiannewswire.com/news/4387713640.html.

8. Federer, America’s God and Country, 248 – 49.

9. Federer, America’s God and Country: George Washington, 634; John Adams, 4; Alexander Hamilton, 273; Daniel Webster, 668; Thomas Paine, 489; John Locke, 397; John Madison, 409.

10. texaslegislativeupdate.wordpress.com/2011/05/18/liberty-institute-arguing-candy-cane-case-implications-for-first-amendment-rights-of–41-million-school-children-and-parents/.

11. www.proconstitution.com/under_god/.





CHAPTER 4: A DIFFERENT SCHOOL OF THOUGHT


1. www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=11601692.

2. education.stateuniversity.com/pages/1878/Compulsory-School-Attendance.html, under subheading “Development of Compulsory School Attendance Philosophy and Laws,” paragraph 3.

3. education.stateuniversity.com/pages/1878/Compulsory-School-Attendance.html, under subheading “Development of Compulsory School Attendance Philosophy and Laws,” paragraph 7.

4. Education of slaves was forbidden in 1740. See www.campaignforeducationusa.org/us-public-education-timeline and www.pbs.org/wnet/slavery/experience/education/docs1.html.

5. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America. http://books.google.com/books, 337.

6. Federer, America’s God and Country, 206 (source quote p. 746).

7. Federer, America’s God and Country, 680.

8. Spalding, The Founders’ Almanac, 150. Excerpted from a letter to WT Barry, dated August 4, 1822.

9. Ibid., 180. James Madison from The Federalist Papers number 10, November 23, 1787.





CHAPTER 5: CAPITALISM: ITS PROS AND CONS


1. www.inventions.org/culture/african/matzeliger.html.

2. www.horatioalger.com/index.cfm.

3. www.usatoday.com/life/people/obit/2010–03–30-stand-and-deliver-teacher_N.htm.

4. Matthew 25:14 – 30; Luke 19:12 – 28.

5. www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew+25percent3A14–30&version=NIV, “A talent was worth about twenty years’ worth of a day laborer’s wages.”

6. www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/face/Article.jsp?id=h–2062.

7. Spalding, The Founders’ Almanac, 158.

8. www.nytimes.com/2009/04/22/education/22dropout.html; www.msnbc.msn.com/id/23889321/ns/us_news-education/t/cities-cited-low-high-school-graduation-rates/; www.usatoday.com/news/education/2006–06–20-dropout-rates_x.htm; www.csmonitor.com/USA/Education/2010/0610/Graduation-rate-for-US-high-schoolers-falls-for-second-straight-year.





CHAPTER 6: SOCIALISM: WHOSE POT OF SOUP IS IT?


1. money.cnn.com/2011/04/19/news/economy/ceo_pay/index.htm.

2. Davis, Don’t Know Much about History, 351.

3. freemasonry.bcy.ca/history/boston_tea_party.html, under subheading “December 16.”

4. The following quotes can be found at http://conservativecolloquium.wordpress.com/2007/11/24/founding-fathers-on-charity-wealth-redistribution-and-federal-govt/.

“The democracy will cease to exist when you take away from those who are willing to work and give to those who would not.”

“To compel a man to subsidize with his taxes the propagation of ideas which he disbelieves and abhors is sinful and tyrannical.”

“A wise and frugal government … shall restrain men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is the sum of good government.”

Thomas Jefferson, First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801

“To take from one, because it is thought his own industry and that of his fathers has acquired too much, in order to spare to others, who, or whose fathers, have not exercised equal industry and skill, is to violate arbitrarily the first principle of association, the guarantee to everyone the free exercise of his industry and the fruits acquired by it.”

Thomas Jefferson, letter to Joseph Milligan, April 6, 1816

“God helps those who help themselves.”

“The U.S. Constitution doesn’t guarantee happiness, only the pursuit of it. You have to catch up with it yourself.”

“There are two ways of being happy: We must either diminish our wants or augment our means — either may do — the result is the same and it is for each man to decide for himself and to do that which happens to be easier.”

“He that waits upon fortune, is never sure of a dinner.”

Benjamin Franklin

“It’s not tyranny we desire; it’s a just, limited, federal government.”

“In the main it will be found that a power over a man’s support (salary) is a power over his will.”

Alexander Hamilton



“The rights of persons, and the rights of property, are the objects, for the protection of which Government was instituted.”

“The diversity in the faculties of men, from which the rights of property originate, is not less an insuperable obstacle to an uniformity of interests. The protection of these faculties is the first object of government. The class of citizens who provide at once their own food and their own raiment, may be viewed as the most truly independent and happy.”

James Madison

“No power on earth has a right to take our property from us without our consent.”

John Jay

“The moment the idea is admitted into society that property is not as sacred as the laws of God, and that there is not a force of law and public justice to protect it, anarchy and tyranny commence. If ‘Thou shalt not covet’ and ‘Thou shalt not steal’ were not commandments of Heaven, they must be made inviolable precepts in every society before it can be civilized or made free.”

John Adams from A Defense of the

Constitutions of Government of the

United States of America, 1787



5. www.epi.org/publications/entry/briefingpapers_bp143/.

6. www.capitalresearch.org/pubs/pdf/v1246489837.pdf; http://www.thirdreport.com/third-report.asp?storyid=365; http://www.naked-capitalism.com/2009/04/socialism-gaining-ground-in-america.html; http://socialismdoesntwork.com/why-socialism-doesnt-work/; http://www.preservearticles.com/201102073940/merits-and-demerits-of-socialism.html.





CHAPTER 7: WHAT IS A MORAL NATION?


1. www.cic.gc.ca/english/work/index.asp.

2. Remini, A Short History of the United States, 274 – 81.

3. Ibid., 326 – 31.

4. Federer, America’s God and Country, 240.

5. John R. Howe Jr., The Changing Political Thought of John Adams (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1966), 189.

6. ethicsalarms.com/2011/01/26/where-we-miss-morality-the-unmarried-mothers-disaster/; http://www.ocpathink.org/articles/354.

7. www.wftv.com/news/25813000/detail.html.



8. www.dailymarkets.com/economy/2010/07/21/the-total-us-debt-to-gdp-ratio-is-now-worse-than-in-the-great-depression/; http://useconomy.about.com/od/fiscalpolicy/p/US_Debt.htm; www.reuters.com/article/2010/06/08/usa-treasury-debt-idUSN088462520100608.

9. For data on the United States’s historical debt, see www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/histdebt/histdebt.htm.

10. freemencapitalist.com/founding-fathers/thomas-jefferson-biography/thomas-jefferson-quotes/, under subheading “Thomas Jefferson Quotes on Government Waste/Debt.”

11. articles.cnn.com/2009–01–16/world/zimbawe.currency_1_zimbabwe-dollar-south-african-rand-dollar-note?_s=PM:WORLD.





CHAPTER 8: LEARNING FROM OUR MISTAKES


1. See oxforddictionaries.com/definition/Motown). Motown: “The first black-owned record company in the US … Motown was founded in Detroit in 1959 by Berry Gordy, and was important in popularizing soul music, producing artists such as the Supremes, Stevie Wonder, and Marvin Gaye.” Motown was an “informal name for Detroit”; the term is “a shortening of Motor Town, by association with the car manufacturing industry of Detroit.”

2. www.blackinventor.com/.

3. Albert Henry Smyth, ed., The Writings of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Macmillan, 1905 – 07), 3:135.

4. William V. Wells, The Life and Public Services of Samuel Adams, 3 vols. (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1865), 1:154.

5. www.working-minds.com/TJquotes.htm, {Issue #54}.

6. Ibid., {Issue #59}.

7. www.monticello.org/site/jefferson/democracy-will-cease-to-exist-quotation.

8. www.constitution.org/je/je4_cong_deb_12.htm.

9. Spalding, The Founders’ Almanac, 188.

10. lifestrategies.thingseternal.com/topics/foundersoneducation.html; www.nccs.net/newsletter/apr99nl.html.

11. www.rutgers.edu/guides/glo-sov.html; www.heritage.org/Research/Lecture/Who-Lost-Russia; http://reasonovermight.blogspot.com/2005/06/cubas-decline-by-numbers.html; future.state.gov/when/timeline/1969_detente/fall_of_communism.html.





CHAPTER 9: AMERICA’S ROLE IN A WORLD AT WAR


1. library.uncg.edu/dp/wv/collection.aspx?col=887

2. www.history.navy.mil/photos/events/wwii-pac/pearlhbr/pearlhbr.htm, paragraph 5.





CHAPTER 10: IS HEALTH CARE A RIGHT?


1. Fifty-two million in 2010: www.bloomberg.com/news/2011–03–16/americans-without-health-insurance-rose-to–52-million-on-job-loss-expense.html.

2. For more information, see Larry Schweikart, The Entrepreneurial Adventure: A History of Business in the United States (Ft. Worth, Tex.: Harcourt, 2000). See also www.american.com/archive/2009/april–2009/Success-on-the-Side.





CHAPTER 13: WHAT’S GOOD ABOUT AMERICA?


1. From Dave Thomas’s biography available on Wendys.com.





CHAPTER 14: WHAT DO WE BELIEVE AND IN WHOM DO WE TRUST?


1. www.ehow.com/about_4597645_do-colors-american-flag-stand.html; www.memorials.com/Flag-Cases-Flag-Color-Meaning-information.php.

2. www.allabouthistory.org/spiritual-heritage-and-government-monuments-faq.htm.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I wish heartily to thank:

John Sloan, Sealy Yates, Bob Hudson, Bill Federer, Scott Macdonald, Don Gates, and the entire team who worked tirelessly to get this book published.





About the Author


DR. BENJAMIN CARSON is a Professor of Neurosurgery, Plastic Surgery, Oncology, and Pediatrics, and the Director of Pediatric Neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. He is a recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civil honor in America. He is also the author of four bestselling books–Gifted Hands, Think Big, The Big Picture, and Take the Risk. He serves on the boards of the Kellogg Company, Costco Wholesale Corp., and the Academy of Achievement, among others, and is an Emeritus Fellow of the Yale Corporation. He and his wife, Candy, cofounded the Carson Scholars Fund (www.carsonscholars.org), a 501(c)3 established to counteract America’s crisis in education by identifying and rewarding academic role models in the fourth through eleventh grades, regardless of race, creed, religion, and socio-economic status, who also demonstrate humanitarian qualities. There are over 4,800 scholars in forty-six states. Ben and Candy are the parents of three grown sons and reside in Baltimore County, Maryland.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins author.





Also by Ben Carson, M.D.

America the Beautiful (with Candy Carson)

Take the Risk (with Gregg Lewis)

Think Big (with Cecil Murphey)

Gifted Hands (with Cecil Murphey)

The Big Picture (with Gregg Lewis)





ZONDERVAN

America the Beautiful

Copyright © 2012 by Ben Carson

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of Zondervan.

EPub Edition © DECEMBER 2011 ISBN: 978-0-310-41734-7

This title is also available as a Zondervan ebook.

Visit www.zondervan.com/ebooks.

This title is also available in a Zondervan audio edition.

Visit www.zondervan.fm.

Requests for information should be addressed to:

Zondervan, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49530



* * *



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Carson, Ben.

America the beautiful : rediscovering what made this nation great / Ben Carson.

p. cm.

ISBN 978-0-310-33071-4 (hardcover)

1. United States – Civilization. 2. Social values – United

States. 3. United States – Politics and government – 21st century. I. Title.

E169.12.C294 2012

973 – dc23 2011037506



* * *



All Scripture quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are taken from the King James Version of the Bible.

Scripture quotations marked NIV are from the Holy Bible, New International Version®, NIV®. Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984 by Biblica, Inc.™ Used by permission of Zondervan. All rights reserved worldwide.

The diagram on page 29 is from Don’t Know Much About History by Kenneth C. Davis (New York: HarperCollins, 2004). Copyright © Kenneth C. Davis. Used by permission. The chart on pages 32–33 is from The 5000 Year Leap by W. Cleon Skousen, copyright © 1981 by W. Cleon Skousen and C&J Investments. Used by permission of the National Center for Constitutional Studies.

Any Internet addresses (websites, blogs, etc.) and telephone numbers in this book are offered as a resource. They are not intended in any way to be or imply an endorsement by Zondervan, nor does Zondervan vouch for the content of these sites and numbers for the life of this book.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means — electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other — except for brief quotations in printed reviews, without the prior permission of the publisher.

Published in association with Yates & Yates, www.Yates2.com.

Cover design: Curt Diepenhorst

Cover photography: Peter Howard and janoid/Flikr

Interior design: Matthew Van Zomeren



* * *



12 13 14 15 16 17 18 /DCI/ 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





About the Publisher


Founded in 1931, Grand Rapids, Michigan-based Zondervan, a division of HarperCollinsPublishers, is the leading international Christian communications company, producing best-selling Bibles, books, new media products, a growing line of gift products and award-winning children’s products. The world’s largest Bible publisher, Zondervan (www.zondervan.com) holds exclusive publishing rights to the New International Version of the Bible and has distributed more than 150 million copies worldwide. It is also one of the top Christian publishers in the world, selling its award-winning books through Christian retailers, general market bookstores, mass merchandisers, specialty retailers, and the Internet. Zondervan has received a total of 68 Gold Medallion awards for its books, more than any other publisher.





Share Your Thoughts



With the Author: Your comments will be forwarded to the author when you send them to zauthor@zondervan.com.

With Zondervan: Submit your review of this book by writing to zreview@zondervan.com.



Free Online Resources at

www.zondervan.com/hello



Zondervan AuthorTracker: Be notified whenever your favorite authors publish new books, go on tour, or post an update about what’s happening in their lives.

Daily Bible Verses and Devotions: Enrich your life with daily Bible verses or devotions that help you start every morning focused on God.

Free Email Publications: Sign up for newsletters on fiction, Christian living, church ministry, parenting, and more.

Zondervan Bible Search: Find and compare Bible passages in a variety of translations at www.zondervanbiblesearch.com.

Other Benefits: Register yourself to receive online benefits like coupons and special offers, or to participate in research.





"I have often said it is the natural tendency of those who achieve power in government to never give it up, and to keep expanding it absent a conscientious effort to say enough is enough.Today we have a gigantic, bloated government that is far larger than our Founding Fathers would ever have permitted. And it keeps growing, in both spending and bureaucracy. It is one of the primary reasons why we find ourselves with a national debt surpassing\u00a0$18 trillion.One of the latest massive expansions came early in the Obama years when a Democratic Congress passed the Dodd-Frank banking\u00a0law\u00a0and gave birth to an entire new agency called the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The CFPB is the ultimate example of regulatory overreach, a nanny state mechanism asserting its control over everyday Americans that they did not want, did not ask for and do not need.\u00a0Don\u2019t get me wrong. Protecting consumers is important. But that protection begins with consumers exercising their own self-reliance, carefully making good choices and understanding the consequences. And when those consumers run into unscrupulous vendors, there are already plenty of strong remedies available to them from the courts and the Better Business Bureau, to the Federal Trade Commission, the FDIC and numerous state and local consumer protection agencies, including state attorneys general.Despite those many protections, Democrats in Congress still insisted on creating a new government agency with many overlapping responsibilities to those regulators already in existence. During that creation process and the five years since, the folly of bureaucracy has been on full display. The CFPB spent royally on itself, even building a headquarters more expensive per square foot than big-name resorts. And rather than help other Americans, the agency has inflicted problems on its own employees, with rampant reports of discrimination, hostile workplace and low morale.But the ultimate reason why I oppose the creation of new bureaucratic machines is that once started they know no limits in usurping Americans\u2019 liberty. The CFPB has gone looking for problems to solve that don\u2019t exist or that already have good solutions on the table. And in that process, bureaucrats begin dictating lifestyle choices.\u00a0\u00a0CFPB has done little to rein in the Wall Street banks which, along with complicit federal regulators, caused the very financial crisis and massive consumer abuses it was designed to combat.\u00a0 Rather, the Bureau is devastating Main Street with regulatory costs.\u00a0While Wall Street can easily afford massive fines, and increased compliance costs, community bankers and others who make up the backbone of Main Street America can not. This regulatory burden is suffocating one of the life-line financing mechanisms for small business. In fact, the cost of compliance with one-size-fits-all regulations from CFPB and other regulators is now the number one threat to community banks. \u00a0\u00a0Likewise,\u00a0the CFPB\u2019s current plan to regulate payday lenders out of business, is actually a boon to the growing illegal internet lenders who increasingly operate from off-shore.\u00a0 Again, excessive one-size-fits-all regulation by CFPB threatens the viability of small town lenders who follow the rules, and creates a monopoly for Wall Street banks who can absorb those costs, and illegal lenders ramping up to serve the flood of desperate working Americans.For the well-paid and elitist bureaucrats in Washington, there is no need for check cashing\u00a0stores that provide short term loans between paychecks. That\u2019s because they are already too well paid for such services. But for hard-working Americans who live paycheck to paycheck, and sometimes fall short in-between, payday loans are an occasional but essential necessity to get by.Now I understand that there have been some unscrupulous vendors uncovered by the media over the years. And I oppose any business that takes advantage of hard-working Americans. But many states have already reined in these bad actors. Take for instance Florida, which a decade ago created a bipartisan pay day lenders reform that today is heralded as a model of success.The CFPB doesn\u2019t want to let the states do their jobs, even when they are doing good work, like in Florida. It wants to impose a one-size-fits-all mandate that gives its bureaucrats ALL the control. In essence, the agency is saying with its newest regulatory onslaught that it will trust a middle class American to take out a credit card with a monthly interest fee between 12 and 18 percent but must regulate the working poor and possibly deny them the right to take out a short-term loan secured by their next pay check with an interest rate around 15 percent. Seems rather arbitrary and nanny state like, right?Now I\u2019m not the only one concerned. Recently some of the most powerful Democrats in Congress, including Reps. Alcee Hastings and Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, added their voices of objection to CFPB\u2019s overreach. These are no pro-business hacks. These are true blue Democrats, including Mrs. Wasserman Schultz who is the current chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. Their concerns aren\u2019t partisan. They are consumer-oriented. They understood that a one-size-fits-all mandate from CFPB will hurt consumer choice and is unnecessary in states like Florida that already have done a good job solving concerns about pay-day lenders. And so they bravely stood up to their own president and his regulatory kingdom to say enough is enough.The CFPB is an agency searching for a reason to exist, so it keeps regulating and expanding its powers to justify itself. In so doing, it is simply usurping freedom and wasting valuable tax dollars like so much of the rest of the federal government. If I am elected president, it\u2019s exactly the sort of agency I plan to rein in.Remember busing, that brilliant social experiment that was to usher in a new era of racial utopia in America? Undaunted by the failed socialist experiments of the 1980s, the Obama administration has recently implemented a new Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) rule designed to \u201cdesegregate\u201d housing by withholding funds from communities that fail to demonstrate their projects \u201caffirmatively further\u201d fair housing.To place this in context, it\u2019s useful to look back at the failure of school busing. After Brown v. Board of Education effectively ended de jure discrimination in public accommodations from schools to housing, many whites in the South continued to flout Brown and did everything they could to keep blacks out of all-white high schools.In response, various municipalities mandated busing as a means of forcibly integrating public education and \u2014 by fiat \u2014 ensuring that educational funding was not unequally distributed based on race. The rationale was that if white parents had to send their children to black schools, they would help to ensure that those schools were better equipped.But by almost every objective, the experiment failed. Not only was there no real statistical improvement in school integration (the percentage of blacks attending majority black schools from 1972 to 1980 moved from 63.6 percent to 63.3 percent), but the program was unpopular among both blacks and whites.Both middle-class whites and blacks who could, fled to the suburbs to escape mandated busing. This contributed to a blighted inner cities in which poverty and school segregation became even more concentrated. Furthermore, even inner-city black school districts resented busing and the fact that their children were forced to travel for hours as part of a social experiment.To be fair, white flight was not exclusively the consequence of forced integration policies. Other private and public housing policies such as redlining, restrictive covenants, discriminatory steering by real estate agents and restricted access to private capital \u2014 all attempts at social engineering \u2014 exacerbated the suburban segregation in the 1970s and \u201880s.It is true that the Fair Housing Act and other laws have greatly reduced explicit discrimination in housing, but significant disparities in housing availability and quality persist. To address them, The Obama administration\u2019s new agency rules rely on a tortured reading of the Fair Housing laws to empower the Department of Housing and Urban Development to \u201caffirmatively promote\u201d fair housing, even in the absence of explicit discrimination.The new rule would not only condition the grant of HUD funds to municipalities on building affordable housing as is the case today, but would require that such affordable housing be built primarily in wealthier neighborhoods with few current minority residents and that the new housing be aggressively marketed to minorities. In practice, the rule would fundamentally change the nature of some communities from primarily single-family to largely apartment-based areas by encouraging municipalities to strike down housing ordinances that have no overtly (or even intended) discriminatory purpose \u2014 including race-neutral zoning restrictions on lot sizes and limits on multi-unit dwellings, all in the name of promoting diversity.These rules come on the heels of a Supreme Court decision narrowly upholding the use of \u201cdisparate impact\u201d analysis in determining whether municipal housing policies have a racially discriminatory effect, whether intended or not. Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs vs. Inclusive Communities Project, et al., turned on whether the Texas housing agency decision to authorize more subsidized housing developments in poor rather than wealthy areas was racially discriminatory since it resulted in less affordable housing being made available in wealthier, non-black areas. The court ruled that it was proper for the lower courts and HUD to make a determination based on \u201cdisparate impact\u201d rather than any specific intent to discriminate.Fair housing advocates saw this as a victory, but as with other mandated social-engineering schemes, the sort of unintended consequences Justice Samuel Alito alluded to in his dissent lurk in the shadows. New York Mayor Bill DeBlasio recently announced a plan to build almost 80,000 new affordable housing units in the city\u2019s minority neighborhoods, but the new rules could conceivably prevent their construction because of the \u201cdisparate impact\u201d doing so might have on minority access to affordable housing in non-minority areas of the city.These government-engineered attempts to legislate racial equality create consequences that often make matters worse. There are reasonable ways to use housing policy to enhance the opportunities available to lower-income citizens, but based on the history of failed socialist experiments in this country, entrusting the government to get it right can prove downright dangerous.\u2022 Ben S. Carson, emeritus professor of neurosurgery and pediatrics at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, is a Republican candidate for president of the United States.As we stand about 20 months out from Election Day 2016, I have much to learn in terms of becoming both a better candidate and a better potential president of the United States. I do not take the opportunity lightly. In fact, the decision to explore a candidacy for president was one of the most difficult decisions I have ever had to make.After all, there was a lot on the line for myself and my family when we started this process. My family supported me wholeheartedly through an extremely busy and rewarding career as a medical surgeon for more than 30 years. I also enjoyed widespread public respect and admiration for my work. Why, at the end of what most would term an extremely blessed career, would I risk a lifetime of goodwill in order to run for president?The answer came down to whether I and my family felt that there was a call to do something of service to the nation on a broader level. We knew going into the process that I was not your typical politician. I was primarily a doctor and a scientist used to dealing with facts in a clinical and dispassionate manner in order to heal people with rare and life-threatening abnormalities. I was far from a talking head or a political pundit or even a local politician with aspirations of one day making it to the political big leagues.And so we knew there would be a significant learning curve in terms of developing greater skill in communicating to a broad cross section of the American people. We knew that certain issues we felt strongly about \u2014 faith, family and the role of government \u2014 might seem controversial when exposed to the 24/7, 365-days-a-year spin cycle that drives American media these days. It would have been easier perhaps to have spent some time in politician school taking spin classes, so to speak.But that\u2019s not really what we set out to do in creating this campaign. We felt strongly that the process of seeking a leadership mandate was something we needed to do publicly. We would engage the American people openly and seek feedback based on our ideas. We would also seek to develop a deeper understanding of the issues as they affect the lives of everyday citizens and reflect American values around the world. We would make mistakes, of course, but we would learn from them and grow stronger as a campaign.My basic framework on foreign policy, for example, is to meet our various treaty obligations head-on, and send a clear message to our allies that we stand ready to defend them. Although I have visited the Baltic Rim and more than 57 other countries around the world, I am still in the stage of rapidly learning intricacies of global politics. And those dynamics themselves are changing at an ever-increasing pace.I do not believe that you can have too much knowledge. I do, however, believe that wisdom is every bit as important as knowledge, and perhaps an even more important qualification for the job of president. Being able to choose trusted and capable thought leaders on foreign affairs and other matters, and rely upon them to inform critical decisions, is more important to a president\u2019s job than an ability to regurgitate minutiae.One thing is clear. For the past six years the United States has been moving in the wrong direction on a number of important issues, and we must look at the big picture and understand what big moves need to be made to correct our course. Though the learning curve is steep, I am doing everything I can to acquire more knowledge of critical issues and surround myself with capable and wise advisers as I consider this monumental step.Editor\u2019s Note: Additional information from Ben Carson since the op-ed was published. On March 27, 2015, I was advised that a guest op-ed I wrote for The Washington Times on March 25 was raising questions about whether I was describing myself as a candidate for President of the United States. First I have enjoyed my time writing for the Times and thank all of the readers that have given me feedback. While my words may not have been precise, be assured I have not declared my candidacy for President in any shape or form. I have been, and am still, exploring a candidacy as a possibility. In an effort to be straightforward\u00a0 I did not follow each time the political protocol of qualifying by language with appropriate adjectives and caveats. This is a hazard of political life that I am still getting used to. I am not a candidate. My op-ed repeatedly said I was exploring the possibility of such a monumental action, and for now I will leave it at that. Ben Carson.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is emeritus professor of neurosurgery, oncology, plastic surgery and pediatrics at Johns Hopkins Medicine, and president and CEO of American Business Collaborative, LLC. He is a potential presidential candidate and is a former columnist for The Washington Times.Recently, I was temporarily placed on the Southern Poverty Law Center\u2019s watch list for extremism simply because I vocally support traditional marriage. I remember thinking: When did advocating for lifelong love between one man and one woman become a hate crime? Fortunately, the group saw the folly of its ways and apologized, removing me from the list.It was a small battle, a blip in the daily life of someone who has entered the political arena. And I enjoyed the support of many who rallied in the conservative media to my cause to help reverse such a silly distinction. But it wasn\u2019t that long ago when liberal extremism tried to suffocate traditional values, and there were few media voices to come to the rescue.There was one, though, so powerful and elegant, persistent yet graceful. Her name is Phyllis Schlafly. And for the last 90 years she has been a tireless advocate for the nuclear family, for traditional marriage and for common-sense conservatism that resists injecting government into every aspect of our lives. On Wednesday night, she will be honored at the Paul Weyrich Awards dinner that precedes the start of the annual Conservative Political Action Conference.Mrs. Schlafly fought battles most lacked the courage to fight, and time and again she won. She has been credited for single-handedly stopping the Equal Rights Amendment, which in the 1970s was racing on a media freight train toward ratification. Phyllis stopped it dead in its tracks. It was not because she didn\u2019t believe women deserved rights, but rather because she rightfully recognized the ERA was skewed toward favoring young professional woman and that it would punish middle-aged and older women who chose to stay at home and raise their families by taking away \u201cdependent wife\u201d benefits under Social Security and alimony.In those days, it took courage and lots of hard work to roll back what a liberal media had started in motion. But Phyllis succeeded because she was intellectually honest, impassioned and skilled in not only communicating the fight but also in waging it. Likewise, she has relentlessly fought for life, recognizing early on the Roe v. Wade decision would be one of the courts\u2019 worst decisions.Through good and bad economic times, and the ebb and flow of conservative activism, Phyllis has remained a steady voice for common sense and traditional values. Her speeches, books, TV appearances and radio commentaries blazed the way for modern conservatism while also protecting the rights of traditional families from the onslaught of Hollywood\u2019s culture wars.Her voice is as relevant and strong today as it was more than a half-century ago when she made the famous case for Barry Goldwater\u2019s conservatism in her great book \u201cA Choice, Not An Echo.\u201d In her 2014 book \u201cWho Killed the American Family?\u201d she eloquently touched my heart with her keen insights on how President Obama\u2019s agenda and decades of prior liberal tax code changes and court interference had substituted government intervention over parenting, and federal dependency over self-reliance.Like she has for most of 90 years on this planet, Phyllis cut right to the chase in diagnosing the problem with America today. In plain, simple and compelling language she rightfully declared that \u201cthe government is making ordinary decisions about what the kid does that ought to be made by the mothers and fathers.\u201d So simple a declaration, yet so true.For those who believe this battle is already lost or isn\u2019t worth fighting anymore because the cards are stacked against conservatives, I implore you to step back and examine the extraordinary life of Phyllis Schlafly. She has proven that what seemed impossible can be achieved. She has lived a life of virtue, and has never been tempted to compromise. And she has made the most compelling case that the family unit must be preserved in order for America\u2019s greatness to extend into future generations. For that extraordinary contribution, I salute her on this special day.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).The graphic pictures of a Jordanian pilot being burned alive by militants from the Islamic State, or ISIS, were chilling and raised doubts about the humanity of the Islamic terrorists capable of such barbarism. This coupled with beheadings and crucifixions gives us a better understanding of the evil we, along with the rest of the world, are facing.These terrorists have stated their intention to annihilate Israel and to destroy the American way of life, which they consider extremely corrupt and evil. Undoubtedly, we in America have our faults like every other country inhabited by human beings, but it requires the suspension of knowledge of accurate American history to believe, as some do, that we are the source of much of the trouble in the world. Conditions in the world have improved more dramatically since the advent of the United States than at any other time in human history. Our innovation and compassion have provided one of the highest standards of living in the world while lifting conditions in many other nations.Understanding that we are not evil makes it easier to identify evil elsewhere and to combat it effectively. When we accept the falsehood that everyone is equally bad and, therefore, we have no right or obligation to interfere with atrocities occurring elsewhere in the world, we facilitate the development and growth of groups such as ISIS, which are not dissimilar to the adherents of Adolf Hitler, who also aspired to world domination. An objective analysis of American history will demonstrate that we were late in joining the efforts of others to combat evil during both World War I and World War II. Hopefully, we have learned from these mistakes that it is better to fight enemies while they are in their adolescent stages than to wait until they have fully matured and pose a much greater threat.I certainly do not believe that we need to involve ourselves in every conflict on the planet, and I believe we involved ourselves in the Vietnamese conflict without clear goals or strategies. Hopefully, we learned from that experience that it is neither wise nor correct to try to impose our way of life on others. I also believe that there were better ways to handle Saddam Hussein than a full-fledged military confrontation. The better ways would have needed to involve a plan for Iraqi leadership over the long term. These unfortunate experiences have made some gun-shy to the point that they would probably rather be invaded than adopt an offensive war posture.This is a critical time in the history of the world, and we must clear our heads and think logically about the consequences of underestimating the threat posed by a host of Islamic terrorist groups. It is very clear that they have a plan that they believe will yield a victory in their quest for world domination. Some in our country are arrogant enough to believe that such a goal is preposterous. Others believe that our time has come and gone and that resistance is useless.Both of these beliefs are absolutely wrong and do not take into account the strength and resolve inherent in the American character. The battle we are entering will be difficult and will be fraught with surprises, but as Winston Churchill said, \u201cYou ask, what is our aim? I can answer in one word. It is victory. Victory at all costs. Victory in spite of all terrors. Victory, however long and hard the road may be, for without victory there is no survival.\u201d\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).There has been much debate recently over vaccination mandates, particularly in response to the measles outbreak currently taking place throughout the country.At this juncture, there have been 102 confirmed measles cases in the United States during 2015, with 59 of them linked to a December 2014 visit to the Disneyland theme park in Southern California. (It is important to note that 11 of the cases associated with Disneyland were detected last year and, consequently, fall within the 2014 measles count.) This large outbreak has spread to at least a half-dozen other states, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is currently requesting that all health care professionals \u201cconsider measles when evaluating patients with febrile rash and ask about a patient\u2019s vaccine status, recent travel history, and contact with individuals who have febrile rash illness.\u201dOne must understand that there is no specific antiviral therapy for measles and that 90 percent of those who are not vaccinated will contract measles if they are indeed exposed to the virus. This explains why Arizona health officials are monitoring more than 1,000 people after potential exposure to measles. These are pretty staggering numbers that should truly concern not only parents and children, but the general populace.I have been asked many times throughout the past week for my thoughts concerning the issue of vaccines. The important thing is for us to make sure that the public understands that there is no substantial risk from vaccines and that the benefits are very significant. Although I strongly believe in individual rights and the rights of parents to raise their children as they see fit, I also recognize that public health and public safety are extremely important in our society. Certain communicable diseases have been largely eradicated by immunization policies in this country. We should not allow those diseases to return by forgoing safety immunization programs for philosophical, religious or other reasons when we have the means to eradicate these diseases.Obviously, there are exceptional situations to virtually everything, and we must have a mechanism whereby those can be heard. Nevertheless, there is public policy and health policy that we have to pay attention to regarding this matter. We already have policies in place at schools that require immunization records \u2014 this a positive thing. Studies have shown over the course of time that the risk-benefit ratio for vaccination is grossly in the favor of being vaccinated as opposed to not. There is no question that immunizations have been effective in eliminating diseases such as smallpox, which was devastating and lethal. When you have diseases that have demonstrably been curtailed or eradicated by immunization, why would you even think about not doing it? Certain people have discussed the possibility of potential health risks from vaccinations. I am not aware of scientific evidence of a direct correlation. I think there probably are people who may make a correlation where one does not exist, and that fear subsequently ignites, catches fire and spreads. But it is important to educate the public about what evidence actually exists.I am very much in favor of parental rights for certain types of things. I am in favor of you and I having the freedom to drive a car. But do we have a right to drive without wearing our seat belts? Do we have a right to text while we are driving? Studies have demonstrated that those are dangerous things to do, so it becomes a public safety issue. You have to be able to separate our rights versus the rights of the society in which we live, because we are all in this thing together. We have to be cognizant of other people around us and we must always bear in mind the safety of the population. That is key and that is one of the responsibilities of government.I am a small-government person, and I greatly oppose government intrusion into everything. Still, it is essential that we distinguish between those things that are important and those things that are just intruding upon our basic privacy. Whether to participate in childhood immunizations would be an individual choice if individuals were the only ones affected, but as previously mentioned, our children are part of our larger community. None of us live in isolation. Your decision does not affect only you \u2014 it also affects your fellow Americans.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Televised \u201cman on the street\u201d interviews, which are often the source of much laughter, are also frequently quite disturbing. Basic questions are asked about significant or historical events, and it becomes rapidly apparent that many of our fellow citizens have not applied themselves to the acquisition of knowledge and basic information.The founders of our nation were extraordinarily well educated and emphasized the fact that our system of governance requires an informed populace. Obviously, people who are well informed are likely to be contributors to society and are more likely to hold their representatives responsible for what they do in Washington.It is also true that there is a strong correlation between educational attainment and lifestyle. According to a 2011 study by the College Board, high school dropouts have an annual median salary of $25,100. Those with a high school diploma average $35,400. Those with an associate degree average $44,800, while those with a bachelor\u2019s degree average $56,500. Those with master\u2019s degrees average $70,000, while those with doctoral level degrees average $91,000, and those with professional degrees average $102,200 per year. It should also be noted that skilled laborers fit solidly into the middle class with salaries averaging in the mid-five-figure to low-six-figure range. These are averages and, of course, some people make considerably more.One obvious question is how can we increase the number of people graduating from high school and seeking higher education. This is particularly important in our inner cities were public high school graduation rates are often less than 70 percent. The graduation rates from private and charter schools tend to be significantly higher and the home-schoolers are almost universally achieving at a very high level. In most cases, home-schoolers have very dedicated parents who have the ability and resources to provide such an enriched educational environment. This simply is not an option for the vast majority of students. However, charter schools and private schools can be made available through vouchers or the involvement of the private-sector, church and charitable organizations. As a society, we must be willing to recognize what is working and what is not working, and to appropriately place our resources to get the biggest bang for the buck.There has been much talk recently about providing free community college education. First of all, it is only free if no one has to pay for it. It is not free if we rob Peter to pay Paul. Secondly, Pell grants already exist to pay for community college expenses for needy students. For those who are not needy, there is an old-fashioned remedy that is very effective called work. In fact work might even be beneficial for those who are needy. It certainly provided some very valuable experiences for me.It is time for us to begin to emphasize to students that the person who has the most to do with what happens to him in life is himself. The average person lives to be about 80 years of age and the first 20 to 25 years are spent either preparing or not preparing for the future. If you prepare well, you have 55 to 60 years to reap the benefits. If you prepare poorly, you have 55 to 60 years to suffer the consequences. It will not hurt our young people to hear these kinds of words. When we reinject personal responsibility into life lessons, we will strengthen our society.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).A few days ago I had the pleasure of sitting down with Edward Mullins, president of the Sergeants Benevolent Association of the New York Police Department, to discuss potential ways of improving community-police relationships. He has been working with outstanding community leaders like Pastor A.R. Bernard, and they sincerely want to achieve a highly successful outcome to a problem of trust that has spread throughout the nation.One of their proposals involves the establishment of police-sponsored athletic leagues throughout the city. There would be friendly competition between the teams that would be composed of community residents and police. This would, of course, allow both sides to get a chance to know each other and form a relationship that is not adversarial.Most of human societal progress is accomplished through relationships. People who are traditional adversaries can rapidly become friends when they work together, get to know each other and develop positive relationships. This opens the doors of communication and people tend to give each other the benefit of the doubt when they know them. On the other hand, when communications break down, as they frequently do before divorce, the two previously friendly partners often become bitter enemies.AUDIO: Dr. Ben Carson with Andy ParksI have no doubt that these kinds of solutions proposed by Mr. Mullins will be very helpful not only in New York City but across the nation. Unfortunately, there are those in our society who will continue to endeavor to stir up strife and fuel hatred. These individuals wish to create dissatisfaction in almost all areas of American life. Thus, we have a war on women, age wars, income wars, race wars and religious wars. If it appears that our society is falling apart at the seams, it creates more fertile ground for a fundamental change. This divide-and-conquer strategy has proved effective for many groups wishing to topple a prevailing culture over the years. It will also be effective in creating chaos and anarchy in our society if we do not begin to more carefully analyze and control our emotional reactions.If like Mr. Mullins and Mr. Bernard, we are willing to sit down and rationally discuss solutions to our differences, we can build a bond of unity that will be stronger than the inevitable conflicts that accompany life in a complex society. Yes, it does require conviction, effort and even some humility to be willing to make oneself vulnerable enough to invest in a relationship with someone previously unknown. The alternative of continued and worsening hatred and violence makes such a risk extremely worthwhile for all parties involved.We the American people are not each other\u2019s enemies, and we certainly do not need to continue to try to tear each other down, especially when groups like the Islamic State are trying to destroy us. Our fractured relationships simply make their job much easier. We must be able to look ahead and see the big picture of strength that results from a united front and peace that is derived through cultivating friendships.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Warren Buffett became very rich and very famous because he is a terrific investor. Not everyone agrees with his political stances, but his ability to achieve great return on investment is unquestioned.Most people are familiar with the parable in the Bible of the 10 talents. Two servants who made wise investments were praised and rewarded with even more opportunities, while the one servant who simply attempted to preserve his talent was referred to as wicked and his one talent was taken from him.The point is, we have these very complex brains for a reason. Our intricate frontal lobes allow us to extract information from the past and the present, process it and project it into the future as a plan. This means we can plan, strategize and figure out ways to maximize the return on our investment. If we are observant and analytical, we also have the ability to see what is happening in our environment and take steps to change directions if we don\u2019t like it, or accelerate down the pathway if we do like what we are seeing.An examination of American society today would show that we are consolidating power in the hands of relatively few politically powerful or financially powerful individuals, while the middle class, which was once the seat of power, is rapidly shrinking and the dependent class is rapidly expanding. This was clearly not the model that the Founders of this nation were trying to create. In fact, our Constitution was designed to prevent this from occurring. Instead of complaining and despairing, we the people must recognize that this nation was built around us and not around the government. The government is supposed to exist for the purpose of facilitating life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness for the citizens of this nation. It must conform to our will, rather than impose its will upon us.When it comes to investing in the future of our country, we should remember that we had a meteoric rise among the nations of the world because we quickly developed a \u201ccan-do attitude.\u201d Investments that return us to that kind of thinking will be extremely valuable. Instead of fighting each other, we should use our collective intellect to fashion programs that allow us to invest in our fellow Americans, with the return on investment being deliverance from a state of dependency and realization of the tremendous potential for achievement that resides in each of us \u2014 regardless of station of birth. We can indeed become successful investors.I\u2019m not saying that the government is wicked, but like the wicked servant, its programs confine people in a state of dependency rather than advancing them and empowering them to become independent contributors to society.A tremendous amount of resources resides in American business, industry, Wall Street, churches, charitable community organizations and private families. I have witnessed a number of impressive organizations around the country in which members of these entities have decided without government intervention to invest in less fortunate members of their own communities with spectacular results.Every person that we in the private sector invests in is likely to become a contributor to society, which ultimately helps to raise the tide that floats all boats. The purveyors of hatred and division don\u2019t like our system and believe that we should all worship at the throne of the government. They wish to create dissatisfaction with the current system in order to fertilize the ground for a fundamental change. We don\u2019t need a change. We need a fix. With the can-do attitude that was once such an important part of our identity, we can achieve the greatest return on investment our nation has ever seen.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).The Constitution of the United States of America was designed to preserve the freedom and rights of all citizens. Our Declaration of Independence states that all men are created equal and that we have certain God-given rights. With documents like these, how have we arrived at the state of such discord between purported haves and have-nots in our society?Some will try, of course, to discount any discussion of this topic, by talking about the treatment of slaves, indentured servants, Native Americans and others who historically were not treated very well. I am willing to acknowledge that the same human frailties that characterized societies throughout the world found their way into America, but it is unfair to demonize a nation and its many constituents based on the shortcomings of some of its members. Those who condemn America for its past seldom talk about the tremendous good and generosity that has been demonstrated by a country that cannot be denied the title of most benign pinnacle nation in the history of the world.One of the reasons that I find the concept of royalty and celebrity quite amusing is watching people putting on airs and trying to act like someone special when they are acutely aware that, in fact, they are just like everyone else. In my opinion, either everyone is special or no one is special. America is supposed to be a place of equality, and whether a person is homeless or a billionaire, he should be treated well and equally. There is no social class or political class that has the right to lord it over everyone else unless \u201cwe the people\u201d confer such power upon them or allow them to confer it upon themselves without resistance.Obviously, the billionaire can afford to pay for certain things like luxurious homes and cars, and the best seats on airplanes and at the theater. There is nothing wrong with that. It should not cause resentment in a society in which anyone is free to work hard and use their God-given talents to excel and increase their own value in the marketplace. Some will not admit it, but our society would be pretty dreary if everyone shared the same level of poverty with no chance of advancing themselves economically through their own efforts.I realize that it is not a politically correct thing to say, but the real problem is not the existence of wealthy people among us. Rather it is the feeling of helplessness and dependency that has been propagated quite falsely throughout many facets of our society. Perhaps it would be wise for our government to look back at the history of our nation and realize that the unprecedented rise of America to pinnacle status occurred because people knew that if they worked very hard and were innovative and very productive, they and their families would be the beneficiaries of that labor. I am not saying that taxes should not be paid in a fair manner, but I am saying that the government will never be successful in resolving income disparity and other social problems by taking from the haves and giving to the have-nots.The great equalizer in America remains education. A good education or acquisition of technical skills provides tremendous options for everyone, regardless of their birth circumstances. We live in a country where people are free to move without penalty to any state where jobs are available. We need to emphasize the fact that almost any kind of employment confers knowledge and skills that become valuable when trying to move up the economic ladder. One also acquires contacts that can be quite useful for those with knowledge and skill.Those who have achieved great financial success should be encouraged to invest in their fellow Americans, with the return on investment being the transformation from dependency to proud achiever of the American dream.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).It was extremely encouraging to see the United States and Sony eventually stand up to the cyberbullying of the North Koreans by allowing the movie \u201cThe Interview\u201d to be released in theaters around the country despite threats of retaliation.Freedom of speech and freedom of expression are hallmarks of American life, and we must jealously guard these values from both internal and external threats. In fact, all of the freedoms guaranteed to American citizens by our Constitution must be steadfastly preserved, or they will be eroded. Vigilance and courage are necessary not just occasionally, but every day if we are to remain a free society.I am proud of the president of the United States for taking a tough stand on this issue, although I am not sure that his promise of proportional retaliation is the correct answer. The response should go far beyond proportionality, and an example should be made of the perpetrators by using a host of available options to inflict the kind of punishment that will not be easily forgotten. If we use proportionality as our standard, future adversaries will need only to consider certain consequences for encroaching on our rights. If, on the other hand, they realize that the only accurate prediction they can make is that they will suffer enormous consequences, I believe their adventurism would be tempered.I do not advocate becoming a bully on the global stage, but I do believe that strength is a quality that is respected by all cultures, regardless of their ideological bent. I remember how much trouble students in my high school in Detroit caused the weak teachers who had no idea of how to control them. There was one teacher who was only 5 feet tall, but she tolerated no foolishness, and even the burly football players feared her. You could hear a pin drop in her room, though the same students produced total chaos in other classrooms. She was extremely nice to me and the other cooperative students and would go out of her way to make sure we received a good education. I think the lesson here is obvious, so enough said.There was a time when American citizens were relatively safe, no matter where they traveled in the world. Everyone knew that there would be significant consequences for harming Americans. Today, not only is the fear gone, but there is little respect for our leaders because our nation appears to be a paper tiger. This is a situation that can be quickly rectified with courageous and principled leadership. Many will remember the Iran hostage crisis in the late 1970s and early 1980s. During that time, we had a president who was not feared or respected. On the day Ronald Reagan was inaugurated as president, the hostages were released.It is imperative that as a nation, we say what we mean and we mean what we say. This contributes to the safety and stability of the world and, in the long run, will cost us much less money and fewer lives. Our friends around the world should have no better friend and our enemies should have no fiercer foe. We certainly do not need to make everyone conform to our values, but we must protect and defend those values, including freedom of expression, and we should never yield to evil nor should we ignore it at our own peril.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Like many other Americans, I have always had a desire to travel to Israel and visit firsthand the many historical sites of spiritual significance. I was recently afforded the opportunity to fulfill that desire and was not disappointed.In addition to being greatly inspired, I had an opportunity to speak with numerous Israeli citizens from a variety of backgrounds. One of the overwhelming themes in those conversations was the feeling of abandonment by the government of the United States. Some of the more diplomatic individuals said they felt sidelined by a U.S. government that had more important issues to deal with. Of course, they had not forgotten the times that our military and financial aid saved them from utter defeat at the hands of their numerous local enemies.We must remember that Israel is a small country, about the size of New Jersey with only 8 million people. It is surrounded by Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea, with several other hostile nations in proximity. Enemy forces are in control of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, which consists primarily of Samaria and Judea and is home to many elements that are less than friendly toward Israel. If not for the Iron Dome missile defense system, the multitudinous rockets that were launched at Israel this summer from Gaza would have wreaked unimaginable damage on the tiny country. Many Israelis believe, probably correctly, that the aggressiveness of the hostile nations surrounding them is increased when the perception exists that we in the United States are not seriously committed to their protection.Some will say we have no more obligation to Israel than we do to any other country in the Middle East. Perhaps they have forgotten that Israel is one of our staunchest allies in the world and has collaborated with us on many innovative products that have been mutually beneficial. Having a strong and dependable military ally in what is probably the most problematic area of the world right now is certainly a tremendous benefit for us. As a nation, we also have a strong Judeo-Christian heritage, which is important to our identity and the strong value system that once characterized our nation. We must also remember that many other nations of the world are watching our treatment of a longtime ally, since that might serve as a harbinger of how we would treat them.In my many conversations in Israel, I was also impressed by the level of optimism I found. Despite the fact that Israelis must send their children to school in armored buses and take many other life-changing precautions on a daily basis, most of them did not seem to be bitter, and they were determined not to let terrorists take control of their lives. The opportunity to visit their thriving and innovative technology sector will never be forgotten. While birthrates are declining in America and Europe, the Israeli birthrate is increasing and is slightly over three children per family. Historically, pessimistic people do not tend to have increasing birthrates. If they can be optimistic while facing death, hatred and attempted destruction every single day, is there a lesson there for us?We live in a country with significant personal freedom, a formidable military, significant levels of common decency, numerous economic opportunities and many other benefits. Additionally, we are on the verge of gaining energy independence, which will positively impact our portfolio of diplomatic options. With the courage and fortitude to take advantage of these and many other benefits, there is no reason that optimism should not reign supreme in America.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).The recent release of a Senate report commissioned by Democrats regarding torture of terrorism suspects in order to obtain vital information was, in my opinion, a waste of $40 million of taxpayer money.It already had been documented extensively that three suspects were waterboarded and that techniques such as sleep deprivation were used to extract vital information from terrorists. That information played a part in the apprehension or annihilation of many upper-echelon terrorist leaders, including Osama bin Laden. The high-profile release of this information at a time when we are engaged in war with various terrorist groups demonstrates a profound lack of wisdom, since this information will be undoubtedly used as an effective recruitment tool by our enemies.Some of the people responsible for the release of this report have publicly acknowledged that it could put members of the military and other Americans at significant risk, because they would now become prized targets for revenge. It seems likely that the unwise timing of this information release was politically motivated, since the control of the Senate will be in Republican hands in January, making its release unlikely.This is a prime example of a potentially lethal disease that has infected Washington, called blind partisanship. It is exhibited when people are more concerned about damaging the other party or enhancing their own party than they are about the welfare of their nation. Of course, we should all be concerned about cruel and unusual treatment of any human being, but we must have enough common sense to recognize that it is foolish to do anything that contributes to the long-term weakening of our military efforts, especially when we are engaged in a war, even though some may not want to call it that.Unfortunately, conflicts and wars seem to be a parts of the human condition from which we cannot escape, even though we must never cease trying. However, when we are involved in a war, we should use every resource available to end it quickly and successfully, including the use of covert weapons and techniques that are not meant for public consumption. It is absolutely foolhardy to believe that everyone is going to abide by the rules of moral war, if there is such a thing. If we allow our enemies to do anything they want to do, including the beheadings of our citizens, but we feel that we must accord them every courtesy and comfort, our days of winning wars will be over. We should not put our military forces, our intelligence-gathering forces or any of our defensive and offensive personnel in a position of questioning whether we will back them up when a problem arises if they are using their best judgment on behalf of their fellow citizens. This will only cause them to be fearful and tentative at times when definitive and aggressive action is warranted.The $40 million that was used on this study could have been better employed to study alternative techniques for extracting vital information from unwilling captives, which could be added to our armamentarium. We also need to understand that peace is much more likely to be realized if we are in a position of strength and possess a military force that cannot be challenged. We also might experience more peace if we try to anticipate and prepare for trouble than if we wait and simply react to ever-increasing problems.Members of both parties need to take time to figure out who the real enemies are and stop trying to demonize each other. We have a lot to be proud of as Americans. Maybe we should spend time studying and talking about that.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Next year, when the employer mandate of Obamacare is activated, millions of Americans will be screaming in pain as their health insurance premiums skyrocket or as they lose their health insurance altogether. It will be just one more piece of the rapidly crumbling health care system that was forced upon the unsuspecting American people through political manipulation and deception.Admittedly many Americans who previously had no insurance were able to obtain insurance through Obamacare. It is good that such people were able to get insurance, but it is bad that they had to obtain their insurance through someone else\u2019s suffering. When the preamble to the Constitution of United States talks about, \u201cthe general welfare,\u201d it is talking about things that are good for all Americans and not just the chosen few at the expense of others. Since only 15 percent of Americans were without health insurance, it would have actually been less expensive and considerably less disruptive to simply grant the 15 percent a fully paid health insurance policy and leave everybody else alone. I am not advocating that it would have been the correct thing to do, but it would have been quite a bit simpler.In the United States, we spend twice as much per capita on health care as the next closest nation, and yet we have horrible access problems and unimaginable inefficiency. For these reasons it is certainly appropriate to look for a solution for all of our citizens. There is nothing in our Constitution about health care being a right, but it is certainly reasonable for a compassionate society, which we are, to provide access to good basic health care for all of its citizens. In order to do this, we need to remove health care from the political arena and recognize that any government proposals affecting the health of all citizens should be free market-based and should be so appealing that it would not be necessary to force citizens into the program. Obamacare certainly did not meet these criteria and played a huge role in facilitating an atmosphere of distrust toward the federal government. When did we reach a point in this country where it was okay for government to fool the people? When did we reach a point where the government can\u2019t be wrong and can\u2019t learn?It is important and urgent that we try to repair the rift that has occurred between \u201cwe the people\u201d and \u201cthey the government.\u201d Claiming that a bill that was passed through deception is legitimate does nothing but pour gas on the fire of distrust that is raging in our nation and manifesting itself in many different ways. If there still exists within our government any desire for fairness and transparency, perhaps we should consider replacing Obamacare or at the very least reopening hearings and recasting votes now that we know what\u2019s in the bill and now that we know that blatant deception was used to pass it. If this is not important to our government, we are in a very serious state of moral decline. Some will claim that the roots of Obamacare are too deep and that it would be much too difficult to back away from it at this stage, but where there is a will, there is a way. Obviously well thought out alternatives needs to be in place and available first.We have learned a lot about what not to do and if we now have the fortitude and courage to do what is right and not what is politically expedient, we can solve the health care problem and move on to one of the many other problems begging for attention.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).As a pediatric neurosurgeon, I was more than familiar with situations where parents experience the premature loss of a child.There are few things that can compare to the emotional devastation that accompanies such an event. This makes the varied emotional responses of Michael Brown\u2019s family more understandable as the tragic events unfolded in Missouri. What is difficult to understand, though, is the benefit that the Ferguson, Missouri, community derives from burning and looting business establishments in their own neighborhoods, especially when unemployment is already a problem. In the meantime, the outside agitators in many cases are sitting in their hotel rooms sipping wine and watching the carnage on television.Hopefully, people in communities such as Ferguson, like people all over America, are beginning to awaken and realize that they should be more than pawns in the hands of manipulators who, in reality, could not care less about them.If the outside agitators and manipulators truly cared about Michael Brown and his family, they would have initiated manifestations of concern long before the political spotlight brought attention and prestige to their cause. They would be outraged about the dozens of young men like Michael Brown who die violent non-police-related deaths in cities throughout America every day. They would be emphasizing education, which is the great divide between the haves and the have-nots in America. A well-educated individual in America today can usually write their own ticket, regardless of ethnicity or financial status at birth.Perhaps it would be useful to highlight the fact that the average American lives to be about 80 years of age. The first 20 to 25 years are spent either preparing oneself through education or not preparing. If you prepare appropriately, you have 55 to 60 years to reap the benefits. If you fail to prepare, you have 55 to 60 years to suffer the consequences. This is not to say that every component of our society should not be involved in trying to produce good outcomes for each of our young people, but rather we need to emphasize that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you in life is you. We must resist the victim mentality that is peddled by so many agitators and manipulators. If you believe you are a victim, you are, and you begin to act like a victim. This renders you an easy target for manipulation \u2014 even the kind that produces completely irrational and self-injurious behavior.Is there racism and unfairness in our society? Of course there is, and it will persist as long as there are people with small, selfish minds. I believe it would be wise to encourage our people to focus on the numerous opportunities available to them rather than on the bigotry that exists. As a youngster, I grew up with a mother who said, \u201cIf you walk into an auditorium full of racist, bigoted people, you don\u2019t have a problem, they have a problem. Because they will all cringe and wonder if you\u2019re going to sit next to them, whereas you can sit anywhere you want.\u201d In other words, don\u2019t let your life be ruined by being sucked into the pathological state of someone else.We have too many important problems to solve in America today to allow ourselves to be consumed by actual or perceived injustices perpetrated by others. We can solve many of those problems by keeping an open mind and considering things from the viewpoints of others. This can lead to constructive conversations about ways to heal the many rifts in our society. One would have to be blind not to be able to see that we have become more divided on issues of race, gender, age, economic status and religion. What happened in Ferguson is a manifestation of that division. It is not a declaration of what our society has become nor a harbinger of our future.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Like millions of other Americans, I appreciate the plight of billions of people throughout the world who would like nothing more than to find themselves in the United States, where they could enjoy a much higher standard of living and wonderful opportunities for advancement.It certainly seems like a compassionate thing to offer them legal status in America and the opportunity to pursue their dreams. It should first be considered, however, that we have millions of people already mired in dire poverty in our inner cities, rural townships and places such as Appalachia who would certainly appreciate a helping hand before we extend one to foreigners. The same principle is seen when you board an airplane and hear the announcement, \u201cIn case of an emergency, oxygen masks will drop from the ceiling. Put yours on first and then administer help to those around you.\u201d There are many around us already in dire need of help.According to President Obama, only those 5 million or so illegals who have been in America for five years or more will benefit from his largesse. He indicates that they will not be eligible for health care and other benefits. Obviously, this fits right in the same category as his promise that, \u201cIf you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.\u201d Once illegals have legal status, it will be difficult to deny them any of the multitudinous entitlements that are freely distributed throughout our society. Also, we must remember that illegals who have been here for less than five years will have to only claim that they have been here longer than that in order to collect goodies. In effect, instead of helping 5 million people, we will probably be aiding at least twice that many. Even this would not be a problem if we had plenty of money. The sad fact is our national debt is approaching $18 trillion. If you paid that back at a rate of $1 billion per day, it would take nearly 50 years. Many pinnacle nations before us have met their fate through fiscal irresponsibility. What makes our leaders think that we are immune from the destructive forces of a shaky financial foundation?The founders of our nation feared that the time would arise when an individual or group of individuals in our government would become intoxicated with their power and attempt to impose their will upon the entire society through dictatorial decrees rather than through the legal process established by our Constitution. For this reason, they established three separate but equal branches of government, dividing the powers. This ingenious method of power division worked beautifully until recently, but hopefully, we are about to experience a demonstration of how the separation of powers preserves the integrity of our system. It will require that the legislative and judicial branches of government manifest the necessary courage to stand up for the people they represent.The American people should not be manipulated into believing that they are heartless simply because they want to preserve the rule of law in our nation and look after their own before they take in others. We also have to consider the millions of people who have immigrated here legally as well as those who are in the queue. It is incredibly unfair to them to grant amnesty to those who have jumped ahead of them in line illegally. I hope all of our government officials will recall the words of the Pledge of Allegiance, with particular emphasis on the part that says, \u201cwith liberty and justice for all.\u201d\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).Jonathan Gruber set off a firestorm of controversy, at least in the conservative media, with the recent revelation of his comments about the \u201cstupidity of the American people,\u201d which allowed the Affordable Care Act to be passed. In essence, he admitted that the bill was written in a way that would allow its purveyors to characterize it as the cure-all and salvation for a health care system that was in trouble, with no danger of their deception being discovered by a populace that was trusting and naive.He obviously never intended for his comments to make it into the public sphere and did not consider the fact that someone is always recording on their smartphone.What is truly disturbing is the fact that our government is willing to engage in the purposeful deception of the populace in order to thrust its secretive agenda on an unsuspecting populace and a sycophantic mainstream media. As I have said many times before, Obamacare was never about health care; rather, it was about government control and wealth redistribution. If there was real concern about the uninsured, it would have been much cheaper and considerably less complex to simply give all the uninsured Cadillac health plans for life. I am a firm believer that health care reform was and is needed, and I have been advocating for it for several years. It needs to be done correctly, though, and in a way that does not create different levels of access and treatment.There is no question that the American people are distracted by sports and entertainment and that we confer godlike status on actors and some athletes. There is also no question that we could do more to enhance our knowledge about important issues. However, to assume that the American people are stupid and uncaring, and to design programs and speeches around that assumption is arrogant, disrespectful and, frankly, very shortsighted. As has been famously said, \u201cYou can fool some of the people all the time and all of the people some of the time, but you can\u2019t fool all of the people all of the time.\u201dThis most recent revelation by the unmasking of one of the chief architects of Obamacare is far from the first and only indication of a pattern of deception and manipulation by the current administration. There appears to be overt contempt for the intelligence of the populace by people who would have us believe that the Benghazi disaster was caused by an ill-defined and little-watched video, and that there was not even a \u201csmidgen\u201d of evidence of wrongdoing surrounding the \u201cphony\u201d Internal Revenue Service scandal, and that the government would never engage in spying on its own citizens without cause. Unfortunately, the administration knows that it can say virtually anything, and that there are some people who are so desperate to believe, that it will be accepted as truth. They also know that many members of the mainstream media subscribe to their same ideology and will protect them, regardless of the consequences.Only people who doubt the analytical ability of the populace would believe that giving people free phones and generous entitlements could purchase their loyalty forever. Only people who think the populace consisted of morons would believe that they could keep delaying the employer-mandate portion of Obamacare until after an important election, and that people would not realize that they were being manipulated.The recent election results indicate the resurgence of an informed populace in our nation. Even though the awakening is not complete, I believe Mr. Gruber may be proven extremely wrong about the intellect of the American people.\u2022 Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).With so much at stake, millions of Americans still did not participate in the midterm elections this week.When the governing structure of our nation was put together, the Founders were excited about the prospect of a nation that placed the needs and desires of its citizens on a higher pedestal than those of the government itself. They also warned that it might be difficult to maintain such a government without it morphing into the usual \u201cgovernment knows best\u201d model in place in most other countries of the world.Some may think that a government that seldom interferes with the lives of its citizens and encourages entrepreneurship, growth, personal responsibility and independence is only wishful thinking and is not practical. (They have resigned themselves to the ever-increasing and controlling government we have now.) Nevertheless, the early years of America had such a government and as a result, the nation rose from the habitat of an assorted group of courageous intellectuals supported by a ragtag militia in 1776 to the most dominant economic power in the world in less than 100 years.What has created the malaise that characterizes so many potential American voters today? I have encountered hundreds of thousands of my fellow citizens on the road over the past year, and I have been struck by the level of animosity toward both major political parties and the feeling that nothing will improve \u2014 regardless of which party is in power. There is also a massive lack of trust in our federal government, which greatly dampens enthusiasm for voter participation. Many others feel that their single vote means nothing. Therefore, exercising their civic responsibility is a waste of time.The real question for conservatives after the gains they have made is whether they are going to put forth an aggressive agenda with the goals of spurring economic growth, re-establishing global leadership, providing encouragement and mechanisms for the downtrodden to capitalize on the ideas of personal responsibility. They should also propose a well-defined and intelligible alternative to Obamacare, develop our abundant natural resources in an environmentally friendly way, and reform the monstrous tax code, among other things. Or are they simply going to try to block further unconstitutional executive action and hope this will further endear them to the populace?The problems we face are too serious and too numerous to put off addressing them until 2016. If we capitulate to frustration and tune out of the political process, we automatically further empower those who wish to fundamentally change our nation. Those of us with common sense and who love the values and principles that made us a great nation must not grow weary of the struggle that is required to ensure freedom and prosperity.We must strive to reinvolve the masses of our compatriots who have given up, using the promise of a nation where \u201cwe the people\u201d compel the government through the political process in place to conform to our will. The next couple of years should be focused on citizen involvement and political activism in order to put forth a vision for our nation.I don\u2019t blame my fellow citizens for being discouraged, given the radical changes that have been forced upon our society by a vocal minority with great political expertise. Let us use that discouragement as the impetus to discard the laissez-faire attitudes that have permitted these fundamental changes in our identity. In doing so, we can reclaim the zeal that characterized our predecessors, who persuaded those within their spheres of influence to actively participate in the shaping of a great nation.Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).It should come as no surprise to most thinking people that Wal-Mart, like many other large employers, recently announced that it would be suspending health care benefits for part-time workers. This is really a double hit on workers: In many cases, they previously had full-time, 40-hour-per-week jobs before being reduced to part-time status and now losing their health benefits.The \u201cAffordable Care Act,\u201d which probably seems less affordable to most Americans as we find out more about it, is the cause of this unnecessary misery. When the employer mandate, which is part of Obamacare, is activated early next year, tens of millions more Americans will face dramatic hikes in the cost of the health care they are currently receiving or will lose it all together. The current administration understood that this would happen, which occasioned the issuing of several executive orders delaying the implementation of the employer mandate until after the November 2014 elections.The thing that is most disturbing to me about this government-manufactured attack on the well-being of hardworking American citizens is the apparent contempt for the intelligence of the American populace. These kinds of maneuvers assume that many citizens are not bright enough to realize that they are being manipulated politically and will not realize that things that impact them so negatively are being pushed off until after an election, when they willingly give their votes to the very people who are using them.The same slick politicians who convinced large portions of the populace that Obamacare would be the panacea for all of their medical needs, and that you could keep your doctor and your insurance if you were satisfied with them, also told us that the Internal Revenue Service scandal was phony, and that pertinent records and emails coincidentally disappeared from the computers of the main people under suspicion. They also want people to believe that the tragedy in Benghazi was the result of an inflammatory video and that anyone questioning the veracity of such a scenario is clearly a partisan troublemaker who dislikes the current administration.The list of problems is too long for this article, but any objective individual would not have a difficult time understanding that Americans are faced with a less-than-honest government, as well as a press that has forgotten why it is protected by the First Amendment of the Constitution. The Founders envisioned the press as an ally of the people, rather than an arm of a political ideology. All of us, including the press, must learn the difference between policies that are pro-America and anti-America, and to recognize those that are meant to benefit a particular party.This situation leaves \u201cwe the people\u201d with an incredibly important choice regarding our relationship with those who govern us. We can go along to get along and make sure that no one calls us a nasty name or challenges our comfort \u2014 or, like the patriots who preceded us, we can embrace the values and principles that once gave us a strong identity as a \u201ccan-do nation\u201d with strong faith and compassion.Those are the values that allowed a ragtag army during the American Revolution to defeat the most powerful military force on earth. They did not possess a superior fighting force or ingenious strategies, but they did hold strong beliefs, for which they were willing to die, while the British soldiers were just following orders. That same kind of conviction today can lead us to become informed voters and exercise the powers vested in us courageously.Historically, during great cultural clashes, those with strong convictions and beliefs have overcome those with weak convictions, who have lost their identity. We are now involved in a worldwide conflict with forces that wish to destroy America and our way of life. We can capitulate to the forces of political correctness and surrender everything that made us strong and unique for the sake of not offending anyone, or we can proudly embrace the values and principles that made us great, honor our Constitution and place our trust in God. This is our best safeguard.Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Vote: Make Your Voice Heard\u201d (Tyndale).We have heard much about the tragic events in Ferguson, Mo., during which a young man lost his life, a community became enraged, and many differing definitions of justice emerged. All human life is precious, and we should be concerned when any life is prematurely terminated, regardless of the circumstances. If we as a society could focus the same kind of attention on the everyday murderous carnage that threatens the vitality of many of our cities, perhaps some meaningful solutions could be found.Growing up in inner-city America, I witnessed many instances of premature death, usually inflicted by other inner-city residents. I also witnessed many stories of triumph that produced very successful individuals out of the same environment. Perhaps it would be worthwhile to study the factors that led to success instead of tragedy in the same environment. Obviously, volumes have been written about this topic, on which many consider themselves experts. In many cases, the observations and analyses are accurate and thought-provoking, and in many cases they are cowardly and pandering.There is a long list of factors highly correlated with success regardless of the environment. They include strong supportive families, a sense of personal responsibility, good role models, faith that produces a sense of purpose and values, hard work, confidence, courage, emphasis on education and caring neighbors. As many who have read some of my books know, I have written volumes on all of these topics, and all are deserving of much attention, but I will focus on the last three in this limited article.We live in an increasingly technical world, where knowledge is power. Even in an economy that is stagnant, it is still relatively easy to obtain a good job when one has acquired the requisite knowledge and skills. Many sophisticated jobs go begging or have to be filled by foreigners because we are not producing technical graduates in sufficient numbers. We must also look at successful educational models including charter schools and insist that they be made available to inner-city students. There are a number of excellent reading-room programs throughout the country that incentivize students, particularly from Title I schools, to learn to enjoy reading, which profoundly decreases the dropout rate later on. Lack of education in this country is a major barrier between the haves and the have-nots, and we must concentrate on it.I remember as a child referring to some of the older neighbors as crotchety and mean because they never let us get away with wrongdoing. We thought they should mind their own business, and I even remember some instances where their windows would be purposely broken. In retrospect, they were the very ones who kept us out of trouble and, obviously, they usually cared deeply about our welfare. The me-first mentality that has infected our society, along with the fear of retribution, has largely extinguished these kinds of neighbors in many cities today. Given the level of violence, one can hardly blame people for keeping their mouths shut, but we must also realize that if we don\u2019t nip bad behavior in the bud, it only grows, creating more intimidation, and the vicious cycle continues.Courage from the kitchen table, the pulpit, the classroom and the streets was prevalent when I was a child. Many people had no problem publicly denouncing deleterious behavior even if it made them temporarily unpopular. Fear of being called names or being proclaimed out of touch has paralyzed many in our inner cities, just as it has throughout the nation. We must realize that we are all in the same boat and we can sink together in the quagmire of fractious accusations and hatred, or we can rise together to previously unexperienced heights if we learn from past mistakes and embrace the principles that created, in record time, the greatest nation in history.Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).Earlier this summer, I managed to perplex, perhaps even offend, a famous TV interviewer when I declared I wanted a federal government that followed the U.S. Constitution. Seemingly aghast, the interviewer went so far as to suggest my position was a \u201chighly charged thing to say.\u201dImagine that. A journalist who, owing to the Constitution, has the right to report freely and to speak freely, being uncomfortable to hear a fellow American swear allegiance to the Constitution and the Founding Fathers\u2019 vision of a limited central government.I fear we as a nation have drifted too far away from an understanding and appreciation of the greatest governance document the world has ever produced. We have a president today who usurps power never given to him in the Constitution, a dysfunctional Congress so gridlocked that it can\u2019t fulfill its mission as a separate-but-equal branch of government, and a Fourth Estate of media elites who cheerlead for a bigger, more intrusive government that unnecessarily addicts those struggling to escape poverty to handouts, rather than encouraging self-reliance.Let me be clear. Rightly sized and empowered, government serves an excellent purpose. Our Founding Fathers knew that and created a perfect vision for a republic of independent states protected and served by a central federal government with strong checks and balances. Those checks on powers were essential to the Framers, who wanted to make sure three equal but separate branches would ensure we always had a government \u201cof the people, for the people and by the people,\u201d as Abraham Lincoln once so wisely said.Today we have people who are simply overgoverned, subjected to taxation, regulation and intrusions by a massive federal government that our Founding Fathers would never have tolerated. It wants to control what we eat, how we live and even how much we can earn. It values political correctness over freedom, co-dependency over self-reliance and redistribution of wealth over personal success.That\u2019s why I said what I did that Sunday morning to that news-talk show host. I told him I would love to have a government again that placed the Constitution of the United States at the center of its mission, that recognized government was never intended to be intruding on every aspect of our lives. Everywhere I go in this great nation these days, I hear that same plea, from farmers in rural communities fearful the next federal regulation will put their generations-old family farm out of business, to shopkeepers suffocating under an unnecessarily high tax burden to young people seemingly reconciled that their government will monitor, record and track their every movement.How do we reverse this creeping despair that we have drifted too far away from our founding principles? It\u2019s simple. I think we must go back to the source of our great American experiment \u2014 the U.S. Constitution. In a little more than 4,500 words, the Framers created a vision of government that preserved liberty first and foremost and yet found a way to serve the basic needs of a republic. For 200 years, that document guided this great nation through dark times and soaring success. For most of our history, schoolchildren were taught the guiding principles of the Constitution from the earliest age, and even members of Congress with controversial civil rights histories such as the late Sen. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and Sen. Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia kept a copy of that great document in their jacket pocket to remind them of the responsibilities and limits of governance.On this Constitution Day, a wonderful holiday created with bipartisan support just a few short years ago, let\u2019s recommit ourselves to rereading and appreciating our Constitution and ensuring that our children and our children\u2019s children grow up with the same appreciation we were given. Familiarity with the greatest ideas ever created for preserving liberty will breed appreciation. Appreciation will help us all overcome the ignorant political correctness of a few media elites and governing officials who seem to dismiss the fundamental principles of a government that respected liberty first and foremost.Ben S. Carson is author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).The incident in which Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice savagely beat his fiancee in an elevator has garnered much attention, largely because the savagery was captured on video.The video evoked a visceral response in almost everyone, present company included. To brutally attack someone you supposedly love with enough force to threaten her life is very abnormal behavior. If the perpetrator is simply punished, but this behavior is not addressed, it is likely to manifest itself again, perhaps with even more serious consequences. Of course, punishment for this heinous act is warranted, but where would any of us be if, after we committed some terrible act, everyone just piled on and no one sought to help us?Having been the transgressor as a teenager and almost stabbing someone, and subsequently by the grace of God learning how to look at things differently and resolve conflict without violence, I came to understand rage, consequences, penalties and redemption. Perhaps we should all take a step back from our pedestals of righteousness and let rational thought processes have a place in our lives. The point is, let\u2019s not get into useless discussions of whether the punishment for Mr. Rice is severe enough or too severe, because that probably will be pointless. Instead, let\u2019s get help for these people and engage in useful dialogue about the horrors of domestic violence and, hopefully, we can use this as a teachable moment.Undoubtedly, those on the left will say the abominable actions of Mr. Rice are being defended by Ben Carson, who thinks that domestic violence is not so bad. This is nothing more than their usual superficial, desperate attempts to diminish someone against whom they have no good arguments and are worried about. I would happily engage in a public debate with any of my left-wing critics on the issue of domestic violence, punishment and rehabilitation. We might even be able to reach some common ground and make progress if we stop using every opportunity to stoke the fires of hypersensitivity and division in our society. To even suggest that an intelligent person would defend the actions of Mr. Rice or blame his fiancee for the crime is beyond ludicrous. However, if there were not an appetite for such idiocy, it wouldn\u2019t exist.There are some who will say that Mr. Rice was defending himself from his fiancee, who was attacking him. He is so much bigger and stronger than she is that he could easily have restrained her without striking her. There is no excuse for pummeling anyone, much less a smaller, weaker individual. Many have been quick to jump to the conclusion that his fiancee, who is now his wife, has only been in the relationship for the money and that there is no possibility that love enters the equation. This may or may not be the case and is a private matter for the Rice family to resolve on their own. Hopefully, that resolution will involve much-needed counseling to uncover the root causes of their problems. If they can go on to lead a successful, happy life even without the NFL, they will have achieved a good outcome.If the Republican party adopts a clear, optimistic, growth-and-reform message to turn America around, it can win big in November. It could still be a wave election.\u00a0But so far it hasn\u2019t done it. The party is essentially asking voters to give it control of both houses of Congress. Yet it hasn\u2019t told voters what it would do with such a mandate.\u00a0That\u2019s why the GOP must present a true governing agenda. You can\u2019t ask for two-house support without telling voters what you\u2019re going to do with it.\u00a0Right now, according to polling averages from RealClearPolitics, there are 10 key midterm Senate races that are too close to call. These 10 toss-ups will determine whether the GOP has a significant majority, or a majority at all.\u00a0But there will be no wave election unless the GOP has a clear message. In some cases there are specific bills to get behind. But in most cases the party needs to provide a real future vision.\u00a0This is not a new thought. In recent weeks,\u00a0National Review, The\u00a0Wall Street Journal, and\u00a0Investor\u2019s Business Daily\u00a0have called for a GOP agenda.\u00a0IBD\u00a0wants a new Contract with America. The\u00a0WSJ\u00a0asks, \u201cRepublicans for what?\u201d\u00a0NR\u00a0editors say, \u201cRepublicans, make your case.\u201d I see my friend Ramesh Ponnuru, NR senior editor, has written an article about this. And I asked over a month ago, \u201cWhere\u2019s the GOP\u2019s better deal?\u201dPresident Obama and the Democrats have already begun their usual class-warfare attacks on corporations, banks, and successful entrepreneurs. \u201cClose their loopholes! Tax them more, so we have enough new money to enlarge government programs!\u201d\u00a0This leftist approach has failed. And voters know this. But the GOP\u00a0must\u00a0call Democrats out on this. It must fight them with a different vision. The country is ready for it. Voters are ready for an alternative governing agenda. \u00a0Now, within the Republican ranks, there are strong voices with good plans. The GOP leadership should tune in.\u00a0Ohio Sen. Rob Portman is calling for common-sense health-care solutions, including health savings accounts. He wants an energy program that approves the Keystone XL pipeline and opens up federal lands and the Outer Continental Shelf. He urges tax reform, both individual and corporate, to spur economic growth. He\u2019d stop the EPA from over-regulating greenhouse gases and destroying the coal industry. And he calls for education choice that allows parents to use federal dollars to send their kids to the schools they want.\u00a0Sens. Mike Lee and Marco Rubio have put serious policy papers on the table. And Rep. Paul Ryan has a new anti-poverty agenda that would provide a real Republican makeover, and he\u2019s keeping up the fight against corporate welfare and crony capitalism.\u00a0The venerable George Schulz published a plan to get America moving again. It talks about tax reform, regulatory rollbacks, a Federal Reserve monetary rule, and much stronger defense. And former Sen. Phil Gramm echoes a plan set forth by fiscal expert Avik Roy, in which the Obamacare exchanges are turned into free-market platforms without any federal mandates.\u00a0And numerous Republicans in both houses favor immigration reform, as long as it emphasizes border security, and then moves to work permits, increased visas, and conditional legalization.These are all good ideas, and there are plenty more. But so far the Republican leadership is playing small ball.\u00a0Yes, they talk about the Keystone pipeline. And they want accelerated rules for overseas trade, faster federal reviews of natural-gas exports, and repeal of Obamacare\u2019s medical-device tax. Fine. But they need\u00a0visionary\u00a0priorities and a true national agenda.\u00a0It doesn\u2019t have to be a 75-page policy-wonk booklet. But there needs to be something concrete.\u00a0Sen. Ron Johnson frets that the permanent political consulting class is using this as a \u201crejection election.\u201d In other words: \u201cWe\u2019re not Obama.\u201d But that\u2019s a risky approach. It\u2019s like using a prevent defense in football. It could backfire.\u00a0\u00a0Just look at the congressional polling data. Democrats have higher approvals than Republicans. And so does President Obama, even with his rock-bottom national approval ratings.\u00a0My advice?\u00a0Be bold, Republicans.\u00a0Send the voters a vibrant message. Show them the GOP is a change agent.\u00a0\u00a0And finally, heed the words of the brilliant Seth Lipsky, who believes\u00a0optimism\u00a0is the missing element in today\u2019s politics. \u201cThe GOP today has the policy chops,\u201d he writes, \u201cbut nailing the optimism is key.\u201dRepublicans were far too pessimistic in the 2012 election. That\u2019s one reason why they lost.\u00a0State the problems. Then advance the solutions. The country has been in a funk for too long. Our weakness at home is translating to weakness abroad. But this can be changed, and rapidly. \u00a0If the GOP sends a clear, positive, and optimistic message, it can turn this election into a landslide.\u00a0\u00a0Lawrence Kudlow is CNBC\u2019s senior contributor.The international spotlight has recently been shining on Ferguson, Mo., after an 18-year-old black man was fatally shot by a white police officer. There was massive national and international media coverage, much of it engendered by the tantalizing thought that here was a clear-cut case of racism leading to police brutality and indicative of the evil inherent in American society. Violent demonstrations and riots ensued, with massive property damage and many outside agitators descending on the town, supposedly to guarantee justice as defined by mob mentality.Perhaps it would be useful to examine the tragedy with the facts on the table rather than through the lenses of hypersensitized emotions stimulated by those attempting to exploit the situation. Michael Brown was 6-foot-4 and 290 pounds. He had marijuana in his system and was purportedly involved in a strong-arm robbery prior to the shooting. He and a companion were walking in the middle of the street, obstructing traffic and were, therefore, admonished by a police officer to move to the sidewalk. Mr. Brown, who may have been pharmacologically impaired, became belligerent and the ensuing struggle produced facial trauma and an orbital fracture of the police officer\u2019s face. The officer, who may have been dazed by a blow to the cranium severe enough to produce a fracture, attempted to apprehend the assailant and shots were fired, six of which struck the suspect, resulting in a fatality.Regardless of one\u2019s position on the political spectrum, we can all agree that this was a horrible tragedy and needless discarding of a precious life. How could this have been avoided? Two obvious answers: The officer could have simply ignored his duty and backed off when it became apparent that his instructions would not be followed, thereby avoiding a confrontation, or Mr. Brown could have complied with the officer\u2019s instructions, according to his civic duties.If police officers generally adopted the first solution, chaos would reign supreme in all of our streets. If the populace generally adopted the second solution, there would be even fewer incidents of police violence. Last year, 100 black males were killed by police in the United States. In the same year, 5,000 blacks were killed by other blacks, the vast majority being males. Could it be that we are erroneously being manipulated into making this incident into a racial issue when, in fact, it is a component of a much larger social issue?Why are there so many young black men in the streets of America with defiant attitudes that frequently lead to incarceration or death? Could it be that a large number of them grow up without a father figure to teach them how to relate to authority and teach them the meaning of personal responsibility? This is not to say that mothers cannot convey these important social lessons, as mine did. But in too many cases, these young, unwed mothers have never themselves been exposed to personal responsibility and self-esteem, and the vicious cycle continues. As a society, we must concentrate on ways to break this tragic cycle, which is producing a higher poverty rate in black communities across America over the past five years with the attendant increasing frustration that can easily produce potentially explosive, tinderbox situations, as we have seen in Ferguson.Once we get the most powerful economic engine the world has ever seen back on track with sensible economic policies, we should devote some of the tax revenues generated to child care facilities, which will allow many of those unwed mothers to get their General Education Development or higher degree and become self-supporting. There are also a number of programs across the nation that offer free classes that teach social and job skills, which will give many of the young men some different options. We must concentrate on these kinds of programs, because we cannot afford to lose large segments of our society to despair and underachievement in an increasingly competitive world. We have a social crisis brewing if we continue down the path we are on now, but we have the power to change our downward course with true compassion that allows people to rise and escape dependency.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).Many people in this country were shocked when the U.S. Navy recently announced the removal of all Bibles from military hotels under their control. This was in response to pressure from the Freedom From Religion Foundation, a well-known atheist group.The surprise is not the hypocritical stance of the Freedom From Religion Foundation, but rather the fact that an established bulwark of American strength and patriotism caved to a self-serving group of religious fanatics. This last sentence may seem out of place if you don\u2019t realize that atheism is actually a religion. Like traditional religions, atheism requires strong conviction. In the case of atheists, it\u2019s the belief that there is no God and that all things can be proven by science. It is extremely hypocritical of the foundation to request the removal of Bibles from hotel rooms on the basis of their contention that the presence of Bibles indicates that the government is choosing one religion over another. If they really thought about it, they would realize that removal of religious materials imposes their religion on everyone else.Some atheists argue that there should be a library or cachet of religious material at the check-in desk of a hotel from which any guest could order a Bible, Torah or Koran for their reading pleasure. No favoritism would be shown through such a system, and those who reject the idea of God would not have to be offended. This is like saying there shouldn\u2019t be certain brands of bottled water in hotel rooms because there may be guests who prefer a different type of water or who are offended by bottled water and think that everybody should be drinking tap water. The logical answer to such absurdity would, of course, be that the offended individual could bring his own water or simply ignore the brand of water that he does not care for.As a nation, we must avoid the paralysis of hypersensitivity, which will allow us to get nothing done because virtually everything offends someone. We need to distribute \u201cbig boy\u201d pants widely to help the whiners learn to focus their energy in a productive way. We must also go back and read the Constitution, including the First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of religion. It says nothing about freedom from religion and, in fact, if you go back and look at the context and the lives of those involved in the crafting of our founding documents, it is quite apparent that they strongly believed in allowing their faith to guide their lives. This has nothing to do with imposing one\u2019s beliefs on someone else.Those of us who do believe in God can hope and pray that at some point, the secular progressives will come to understand that they must abide by the same rules with which they attempt to control others. There is absolutely nothing wrong with the philosophy of \u201clive and let live.\u201d America was designed to be a free country, where people could live as they pleased and pursue their dreams as long as they didn\u2019t infringe upon the rights of others. By continually broadening the definition of infringement on the rights of others, the purveyors of division will succeed in destroying our nation \u2014 but only if we continue to cater to their divisive rhetoric.Liberty and justice for all has worked extremely well for an extended period of time, and there is no reason to upset the equilibrium by endowing the hypersensitive complainers in our society with more power than everyone else. Thankfully, the Navy quickly realized its mistake and restored the Bible to its lodges. Maybe now we can deal with the real issues that threaten our safety.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).The images projected across our television and computer screens throughout the day as we rest in the creature comforts of our offices and homes are very sobering. They should elicit the most basic instincts of both fear and compassion for hundreds of thousands, perhaps even millions of our fellow brothers and sisters. They are images not soon forgotten, though we have seen them before countless times. Each time we see them, the groans and pain evident on their faces grows more real for us and more difficult to ignore.I\u2019m referring to those around the world persecuted by a group of religious zealots whose behavior is difficult to comprehend. Their intolerance against Christianity is beyond horrible. People are being beheaded for their faith. Women and young girls are being sexually violated and whole families are being wantonly slaughtered in cold blood. Perhaps just as abhorrent is the profound silence of the American government as represented by the current administration. Even though President Obama has declared that we are not a Judeo-Christian nation, we are still compassionate people who should not ignore humanitarian atrocities, much less ones where the victims are only guilty of maintaining a belief in the principles espoused by Jesus Christ.We have an obligation as Americans to denounce these acts of persecution. Even those who do not worship a higher deity should be concerned. For when we stand up to such intolerance, we are defending the root of freedom. We are defending choice \u2014 the ability to worship and call on the name of a heavenly being without fear of torture and abandonment.The president, who very early in his tenure won the Nobel Peace Prize, now has an opportunity to truly be the broker of peace in a very troubled part of the world. He can be a champion of freedom of religion, which is a founding principle of our nation. As long as religious practices do not infringe upon the rights of others, he can make it clear that it is wrong to interfere with those practices.In our own country, we must become more reasonable in the adjudication of disputes about religious symbols. For instance, if a Christmas tree or manger scene has been a long-standing tradition in a community, and one or two people come along and claim that it offends them and must be removed, should those few individuals have the power to interfere with the seasonal joy of thousands who rejoice in the viewing of those symbols of the holiday season? If someone is offended by a menorah in a Jewish community, would it not make more sense to give them some sensitivity training than to disturb the entire community by removing the symbol? I could go on for quite some time mentioning various symbols associated with a wide variety of religions, but I think the point is clear. When we reward unwarranted hypersensitivity surrounding religious ceremonies or beliefs, we add fuel to the hatred and intolerance that subsequently produces religious persecution.I am certain that some will say religious persecution in other parts of the world does not concern us and that we cannot be the police for the planet. Certainly, there is some validity to the latter part of that statement, but if we continue to ignore or tolerate religious persecution elsewhere, it is just a matter of time before we will experience it to a much greater degree than we have already here at home.As far as the Middle East is concerned, we are not helpless and can dispatch the State Department to do all it can to help those in this desperate time of need. Some conservatives and cynics might argue that such a move requires government dollars. Who\u2019s to say? We don\u2019t fully comprehend how besieged these people are, much less know what it would take to grant them relief.Governments need to decry such persecution, and root it out wherever and whenever they can. The United States should lead in that effort \u2014 just as it has with combating sex trafficking and other problems the collective world can and has decried in the past. It is hard to find an issue that demands a sharper clarion call for leadership now.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).The Obama administration\u2019s recent failures in the foreign-policy arena have only highlighted how far American leadership has fallen in this new century. From the Middle East to Eurasia, it often seems that President Obama is reacting to events instead of trying to shape them. Americans have begun to see his collective failures as an indictment on his presidency, and they long for clarity and purpose from their president.The clear foreign policy that is grounded in American ideas of promoting liberty abroad and preserving our security at home is what is needed now. That is how we became a superpower. Reversing these ideas allows our adversaries to become stronger and impairs our ability to respond to present-day threats.While Mr. Obama\u2019s foreign-policy adventures have waxed and waned in the eyes of the American public, his indecisiveness in places such as Iraq and Syria has presented an image of weakness on the global stage. We have failed to adequately deal with Russian aggression in Georgia and Ukraine. Recognizing that the United States would soon be changing administrations, Russia invaded Georgia in 2008. As a nation, we stood by and watched during that transition, as parts of Georgia fell under Russian rule. Russia annexed Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and all we did was condemn it. Russia\u2019s Vladimir Putin sensed our weakness and saw opportunity. Six years later, he annexed Crimea and now pro-Russian forces are trying to take over more land in Ukraine.What has the Obama administration done in response to this aggression by Russia? Not really much, other than impose toothless sanctions on Russian businessmen close to Mr. Putin (but not the Russian president himself) that have done little to make Russia change course. Is this what Ronald Reagan would have done? Or would he have helped pro-democracy Ukrainians and pressed Europe to look for alternatives to Russian natural gas to preclude being held hostage by Russian energy? Additionally, we need to reinforce our commitments to NATO and get the former components of the Soviet Union involved. Otherwise, Mr. Putin will do this again. We need to embolden Europe to confront him.Russia is not the only country that has taken advantage of our preoccupation with the Middle East. Recently, China has been expanding its maritime boundary in the South China Sea. It also seeks to test our resolve to long-held security commitments we have with our partners in Asia. We must do more to let our Asian allies know that we will stand with them and confront China\u2019s territorial ambitions. China continues to threaten our country with cyber-attacks and is a repressive global power. We need to do more to support those people in China who long for democratic reform.If we had supported the masses who were trying to overthrow the tyrannical government in Iran in 2009, I suspect we would be looking at a very different situation in the Middle East today. The United States should always stand on the side of freedom-loving people. What has the Obama administration done to support those who long for liberty and freedom in Iran? More needs to be done.Our foreign policy is rudderless. We are a ship lost at sea. We need to have a foreign policy that is proactive in safeguarding our interests and not reactive to events unfolding around the globe that affect our security. Our friends and allies need to know that we can be counted on when they are in jeopardy or their security is threatened. We must have a foreign policy that is rooted in those ideas that have made us the envy of all freedom-loving people around the globe.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).When I was a small child, one of the most dramatic and effective business boycotts in the history of America occurred. This, of course, was the Montgomery bus boycott. By refusing to ride the bus, blacks who were being discriminated against were able to terminate many discriminatory practices not only in Alabama, but throughout the South. The white-owned businesses were clearly being unfair, and the public transportation system was no better. The actions taken were most appropriate and, in many cases, quite heroic.The power of the purse, particularly in a capitalistic society, is mighty, and business boycotts are a potent tool in the hands of the masses to enforce economic and social fairness. Through the use of the ballot and the wallet, we the people have life or death power over virtually every aspect of our nation.Astute business people generally do not make their political views widely known, because they realize that about half of their customers agree with them and half of them do not. There certainly is no need to unnecessarily create animosity, especially when you are trying to sell products. In the case of Costco, a company highly respected for very wise business practices, Jim Sinegal, the co-founder and CEO until recently, has made no secret of his profound admiration for President Obama and his policies.For the sake of disclosure, before I go further, I should reveal that I have been a member of the Costco Board of Directors for 15 years. There are people on the board of several political persuasions, and we are all friendly and work well together because politics plays no role in business decisions. In the years that I have had the privilege of serving on the Costco board, I have never witnessed a single incident where politics influenced a business decision. Not only would that be incredibly unwise, since both customers and staff are heavily represented on both sides of the political aisle, but it would lead to mass resignations and membership cancellations, including yours truly.Because of Mr. Sinegal\u2019s very public support of Mr. Obama, the recent withdrawal of the book \u201cAmerica: Imagine a World Without Her\u201d by Dinesh D\u2019Souza from Costco warehouses nationwide, just before the release of the movie by the same title, was widely interpreted as a political move, since the movie is very critical of the president. I spoke to the current CEO of Costco, Craig Jelinek, who was so absorbed in the business of the company that he was unaware of the movie prior to the resultant backlash. He readily admitted that those responsible for managing the very limited book space in Costco warehouses should have been aware of the imminent release of the movie and retained the book in anticipation of brisk stimulation of book sales, which had been very sluggish.\u00a0After a public outcry, Costco put the book on its shelves.Costco, which had previously been everybody\u2019s favorite place, suffered a major black eye, not because of inappropriate injection of politics into the business world, but rather owing to uncharacteristic lack of attention to what was going on in a very small segment of the sales portfolio.\u00a0Through my budget-management experiences as a division director at Johns Hopkins for many years, and through many tough financial experiences as the president and co-founder of the Carson Scholars Fund, which is active in all 50 states, I gained enormous knowledge of business practices, but that pales in significance to what I have learned as a board member of both Costco and the Kellogg Co. during the past 17 years. Managing and growing large multinational corporations requires wisdom and experience, and I have enjoyed the opportunity to work with and learn from both politically liberal and conservative business executives. I can honestly say that wise business practices transcend political ideology, and those who intentionally inject their politics into their business do so at their own peril. Their actions will be interpreted, rightly or wrongly, based on their political views.In the case of Costco and the D\u2019Souza book, lack of awareness was interpreted by many conservative customers as political misconduct because of the views of Mr. Sinegal, who is no longer the CEO. Although he and I differ politically, he continues to be a huge financial supporter of the Carson Scholars Fund and many other educational endeavors. When he was CEO, he could not sleep at night if someone else offered a better value on a product. He cared deeply about how employees were treated, and he refused to accept a salary comparable to other CEOs in the industry. Also, he has nothing to do with Costco book sales, nor would he wish to at this point. We have much common ground and are friends, even though we often discuss political issues.There is no need for political differences to precipitate hostility in personal relationships. We can build a strong, prosperous nation together if we are willing to talk and use our collective strengths to accomplish common goals. We must maintain open channels of communication and, as a society, we must learn to vote wisely with the ballot and the wallet.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).I recently returned home after two weeks of engagements in New Zealand and Australia focusing on empowerment through reading. The Kiwis and Aussies are not very different from Americans, even though they inhabit the opposite side of the globe.I was struck by the way many of the people perceived the political atmosphere in the United States. Although the well-educated individuals who had access to all of the American cable channels tended to be very well informed on the issues, most people had only heard that America had finally repaired its broken medical system with the advent of Obamacare and now everyone, including the indigent, had excellent health care. They were under the impression that most Americans were very happy with Obamacare and with their wonderful president, who had ushered in a great new day in America with his brilliance in many areas.Many people were shocked when I relayed the facts about the deleterious effects of Obamacare on employment, skyrocketing insurance premiums and displacement of health care providers. Furthermore, they had little knowledge about Benghazi, the Internal Revenue Service scandal, the Veterans Affairs debacle or the depth of our financial woes. In other words, they were just like a multitude of Americans who pay little attention to sources of their news and are not curious enough to seek multiple news sources and arm themselves with enough historical knowledge to be able to decipher truth from fiction.Fortunately, I found that most of the people Down Under were not nearly as dogmatic in their beliefs as Americans have become. Our people on either side of the political spectrum tend to be more close-minded, partaking only of news sources that align with their ideological beliefs and, in many cases, engaging in demonization of other information sources. This, of course, leads to intolerance and ignorance, which are associated with a whole cadre of societal problems. Frequently, that narrow-mindedness is encouraged by hyperpartisan individuals, who actually call out news outlets such as the Fox News Channel for ridicule.Such people might do well to ask themselves what would become of our country if the people only heard what the government wanted them to hear. If they could be honest with themselves, I think that even they would have to admit that they would be uncomfortable in that setting. The mainstream media could provide a great service not only to the American people, but to the people of the world, by embracing their duty to be objective investigators and reporters of the news. I realize that the likelihood of that occurring is small, but hope springs eternal.I was delighted with the enthusiasm surrounding the reading of books Down Under and with the understanding that virtually any young person, regardless of their economic background, can empower himself with the knowledge that comes from reading. This acquisition of knowledge is the antidote for the herd mentality induced by the agenda-driven, biased media. Reading was emphasized so strongly among the early settlers of America that anyone finishing the second or third grade was completely literate, as is borne out in the absolutely beautiful prose that characterized the writing style and letters received from the Western frontiers of America in the early 19th century. Many of the aristocrats of the South also exhibited impressive writing skills and understanding of the English language. Interestingly, the same highly educated rulers forbade under enormous penalty the teaching of slaves to read. They fully understood how empowering education and knowledge are. It is likely that Frederick Douglass fled the plantation to escape the wrath of his master, who was displeased that his slave was learning to read. Slaves were supposed to be obedient and grateful for the magnanimous protection and provisions afforded them by their \u201cwonderful\u201d masters.Today many people in America slavishly devote themselves to a political party without engaging in critical analysis of whether the philosophies of that party are really in sync with their true values and with the betterment of their position in society. If decades of such devotion leads to more broken families, more out-of-wedlock births, more involvement with the criminal justice system, more poverty and more dependency on government, maybe it is time to ask whether such devotion is warranted.I was honored and delighted to be able to encourage many of the disadvantaged young people of Australia and New Zealand to take control of their own destinies through education and reading. I was thrilled by the generous financial contributions to the Carson Scholars Fund provided by the trip sponsors, which enables us to reach more American students and emphasize the acquisition of knowledge and the development of humanitarian qualities.I am convinced that the dreams of our Founders of a free nation filled with knowledgeable and caring people who trust in God and accept personal responsibility is still possible. Each of us has a role to play in the realization of that dream. A big part of that role is self-education. We need to read all kinds of books and articles, and experience a variety of electronic media. We should not engage in self-censorship, which creates a proclivity for indoctrination. I am convinced that a well-informed American populace will not be manipulated into relinquishing a beautiful American dream for all.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).It\u2019s fortunate the Supreme Court of the United States saw fit last week to rule that corporations could not be coerced into covering religiously objectionable forms of birth control for their employees. This was a critical ruling because it indicates that the majority of the court still thinks that religious beliefs and personal choice have a valid place in American society. The margin of the split decision, however, is alarming because it reminds us of how close we are to having a government that will subject moral convictions to its bureaucratically directed control.People have legitimate differences of opinion about the appropriateness of various forms of birth control, which is something that most reasonable people on both sides of the political ledger understand. However, legally requiring the side opposed to a form of birth control to be financially responsible for its distribution to any employee who wants it is distinctly un-American and abusive to the concept of freedom of religion.A major problem is that many people in our entitlement society see nothing wrong with forcing others to provide for their desires. In a free and open society, anyone should be able to purchase anything they want that is legal. It really should be no one else\u2019s business. Common sense dictates, however, that it immediately becomes my business if I\u2019m being forced to pay for it. Wouldn\u2019t it be fairer and make more sense for people wanting some form of birth control to pay for it themselves? This is exactly what would happen if everyone had access to their own health savings account. A woman and her health care provider would decide on a birth-control method, and the cost would be deducted from her account with no involvement of anyone else in any way. It\u2019s so simple, and upholds privacy and freedom.Health savings accounts can be funded in a variety of different ways and give people total control of where, how and with whom they wish to spend their health care dollars. Most people will want to get the biggest bang for the buck and will independently seek out both value and quality. That, in turn, will bring all aspects of medicine into the free-market economic model, thus automatically having an ameliorating effect on pricing transparency and quality of outcomes.Many corporations and communities already have very positive experiences with health savings accounts. Those experiences could be further enhanced by allowing family members to shift the money in their accounts among themselves. For instance, if a family member was $500 short for a procedure or test, another family member could provide the money by authorizing its deduction from his account. This provides a whole other level of flexibility to the concept of health savings. The overwhelming majority of encounters with the medical world could be handled through this type of system, eliminating bureaucratic delays and frustration.Under the multitudinous rules of Obamacare, the amount of money allowed to be managed through health savings accounts is severely restricted. Perhaps that is because the crafters of this gigantic, bureaucratic monstrosity realized that a well-functioning savings system would be easy to understand, much less expensive and give people control of their own health care. It would also eliminate two-tiered systems of health care, making every patient equally desirable from a business perspective. There should be no limit to the amount of money that can be contributed to and managed in an account. Money unspent at the end of the year should simply continue to accumulate without penalty.If accounts are established at the time of birth, they will be even more potent because the vast majority of people will not experience catastrophic or even major medical events until well into adulthood. By that time, a great deal of money will have accumulated. Since bridge or catastrophic insurance will not be drawn upon for routine medical expenses, its costs will plummet, very much like homeowners insurance, which costs vastly less when there is a high deductible. Somehow over the past few decades, we as a society have wandered away from the concept of using health insurance only for major medical issues and paying for routine services ourselves. This is largely responsible for the tremendous spike in medical costs, and by using the health savings account system, we can return to a semblance of rational thinking.The 5 percent of patients with complex pre-existing or acquired maladies would need to be taken care of through a different system, similar to Medicare and Medicaid, but informed by the many mistakes in those programs from which we can learn. Even this kind of system should have elements of personal responsibility woven into it.The bottom line: Health care for all of our citizens is the responsibility of a compassionate society and is well within our grasp if we don\u2019t make it into a political football. The majority of Americans are unhappy with Obamacare and would prefer something that is simple, effective and under their own control. We do not have to settle for something imposed upon us for reasons other than good health care.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).Speaker of the House John A. Boehner recently shocked many when he announced that he was planning a lawsuit against the president for abuse of power. There is a feeling by many that a harmonious working relationship between the branches of government has been seriously compromised in recent years. When Alexis de Tocqueville visited America in 1831 to perform an in-depth analysis of the American phenomenon, he was duly impressed by our well-structured, divided government with separation of powers.The writings of the Founders of this nation certainly referenced the Bible frequently, but also paid great homage to the writings of Baron Charles Montesquieu, who wrote quite prolifically about political theories. One of his most well-known works is \u201cThe Spirit of the Laws.\u201d In this book, he eloquently argues for the concept of separation of powers. That argument seems to emanate from the Bible\u2019s book of Isaiah, 33:22, where it states, \u201cThe Lord is our judge [judicial branch], the Lord is our lawgiver [legislative branch], the Lord is our King [executive branch].\u201d Certainly this system of government has worked extremely well for us in the past, helping to establish the United States of America as the most powerful nation the world has ever known within a relatively short period of time.In order for a divided government to work, each branch must respect the other two branches. There have always been and always will be squabbles between the branches, but the big problem now is that the executive branch has decided to ignore anyone with whom it disagrees, including the U.S. Congress. Nowhere was this blatant disregard of Congress more clearly manifested than in President Obama\u2019s inappropriate \u201crecess\u201d appointments of three people to the National Labor Relations Board. He redefined the word recess in order to appoint individuals who might have a difficult time obtaining congressional approval. This administration seems to have a penchant for redefining words to make them conform to its ideology. Obviously, if an individual can redefine anything any time he wants to, he can manipulate virtually any situation into a favorable position for himself. If he is clever and no one is noticing, he can fundamentally change the foundational fabric of a society.PHOTOS: See Obama's biggest White House failsPassing a law in the usual legitimate fashion and then unilaterally changing the law is another thing that this administration seems to cherish. Obamacare is a prime example of this tactic. For example, it would be like a ruler and his council passing a law against the growing of Brussels sprouts, much to the pleasure of his constituents. He then discovers that his favorite brother, who lives in Province A, is the largest farmer of Brussels sprouts in the region and is also his biggest financial supporter. He then unilaterally amends the law to exclude Province A, much to the displeasure of the populace, about whom he cares nothing. The point is it is inconsistent with fairness to establish rules and then change them in the middle of the game without the consent of the other participants.This article and many others could be spent detailing all the instances that support the argument of executive branch overreach, but the truly important thing is to begin asking ourselves how can we re-establish a truly cooperative and harmonious balance of powers aimed not at the enhancement of one political party or the other, but rather at providing life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness for the people. This is clearly what the people want, as indicated by their voting to put a liberal president in the White House and a conservative majority in the House of Representatives. The people of this country are not comfortable with runaway government in either direction.Some will say that previous presidents used even more executive orders than Mr. Obama. In some cases this is true, but it is not the number of executive orders that is important. Rather, it is the effect of those orders, how they impact society and what precedents they set. When something is clearly wrong, citing a previous misdeed by someone else does not serve as adequate justification. This is like the kid who gets in trouble for hitting someone and says, \u201cHe hit me first.\u201d Since there is so much childish behavior in Washington, perhaps government officials need the same explanation as the children who fight. Namely, no one should be hitting anyone, and we should divert that energy to understanding the nature of the conflict and resolving it.Civil conversations would obviously go a long way toward helping us as a nation to solve our problems. However, as Saul Alinsky said, \u201cNever have a conversation with your adversary, because that humanizes him, and your job is to demonize him.\u201d This is why we see so much name-calling and finger-pointing these days, which is antithetical to our success as a nation.When the pendulum swings once again to the right, it is vitally important that people with common sense govern with the Constitution in a way that respects the separation of powers. There can be no picking and choosing of laws to enforce, and no favoritism. The only special-interest group that should be considered are the American people.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).The audacity of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in canceling the trademark of the Washington Redskins is frightening. When the government is in charge of deciding what is offensive and what is not, and has the power to punish the \u201coffenders,\u201d we move further away from a free society and closer to a tyrannical nanny state.We are not talking about a political issue that should have Democrats and Republicans coming down on different sides here, but rather the fundamental freedom to express oneself, which is a part of the fabric of America. In the case of Dan Snyder, who owns the Washington Redskins, he is being demonized for standing up for basic American principles. The team bore the same name when he purchased it in good faith. There was no indication at the time that subsequent demands for a name change would emerge, costing him millions of dollars in related expenses, not to mention lawsuits he might encounter by other businesses that could be injured by such a move.There is no indication that many in the Native American community are upset after decades of the team\u2019s prominent and proud display of its mascot and name. This appears to be yet another case of purposefully induced hypersensitivity, providing yet another opportunity for unnecessary heavy-handed government tactics to infringe upon the peaceful existence of Americans.I have had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Snyder, who is far from the demonic characterization seen in the gullible press that allows itself to be manipulated by those wishing to bring about fundamental change in America. I do not doubt for one minute that the Redskins organization would change the name tomorrow if it thought it was truly offensive to most Native Americans. Also, the majority of American citizens are still decent people who would not only demand a name change, but would vote with their feet and purses in a way that would send a loud and convincing message \u2014 if they thought the name was offensive. It appears that many have forgotten the power of free-market economic forces and have instead placed their trust in flawed government forces. Historically, individual freedoms vanish as government interventions increase.Traditionally, sports teams choose mascots and names that bring them pride, rather than shame. There are numerous sports teams throughout the nation with colorful names and symbols, who are not out to offend anyone. In a large, diverse society, it is likely that almost anything is offensive to someone. I suspect there are those who are offended by the fact that the Duke University basketball team is called the Blue Devils. Some would ridiculously opine that this nomenclature pays homage to the forces of evil. Should we cater to such foolishness, or should we grow up and focus on real issues, such as unacceptable rates of unemployment, terrorism, energy development, education, poverty, a stagnant economy, massive corruption, illegal immigration, growing national debt and many other things of greater importance?We, the American people, must cease being distracted by peripheral issues and demand that our government officials focus their attention on the myriad problems that threaten to destroy our way of life. Like the ancient Romans, we are in danger of being distracted by relatively unimportant issues while our society crumbles beneath us. I challenge those who say I am exaggerating to a debate on this issue.Many people equate political correctness with kind and compassionate speech. The two things are vastly different with very different purposes. Political correctness is meant to control thought patterns and speech content, creating unanimity and societal conformity, while kind and compassionate speech is meant to take into consideration the feelings and circumstances of others without compromising the truth. It is a much better alternative. We need to be wary of those who attempt to convince groups of people that they should be offended by a word, phrase or symbol instead of concentrating on the real message being conveyed. These people remind me of the troublemakers in grade school who enjoyed watching the fallout from their devious ploys.In today\u2019s politically correct society, we are in danger of extinguishing interpersonal communications altogether for fear of offending someone. All of this would be comically absurd if it were not so tragic and such an immense departure from the vision of a free and prosperous society that was envisioned by our Founders.Rather than concentrating on unanimity of thought and speech, we must concentrate on extracting the meaning of verbal communications. Examining every word or phrase for possible offense is beyond stupid. More importantly, it is divisive and destructive. We must outright reject those who try to manipulate emotions for their own political advantage. The Founders of our nation were very concerned about what would happen if the populace became uninformed and refused to think for themselves. They feared the day when Americans could be easily led and manipulated, which would lead to a drastic alteration of our nation.The power to stop the erosion of our values and to restore common sense and prosperity to our nation is in our own hands. We must shake off the passivity and vigilantly guard against manipulation.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).In 2012, the current administration made it clear that certain unaccompanied illegal minors would not be deported if caught. This helped create an atmosphere of tolerance that would be conducive to the current rash of illegal dumping of thousands of children from south of the border into the United States. Now we have a humanitarian crisis that appears to have been manufactured for political reasons.One would not have to be incredibly bright to predict that families in South and Central America, as well as in Mexico, would recognize a veiled invitation to get their children into the United States with little chance of deportation. Of course, the media are asking opponents of the administration for solutions to this crisis. Almost anything these opponents suggest will be either harsh, making them appear cruel and callous, or weak, making them appear to be amnesty supporters. Either way, they will take a political hit. Meanwhile, the administration can stay above the fray and receive the political benefit of gratitude from many legal and illegal immigrants. It\u2019s a clever and effective ploy with the added benefit of redistributing even more American wealth. It remains to be seen how many people will be hoodwinked.We have all heard it said many times that America is a land of immigrants, some voluntary and some involuntary, but immigrants nevertheless. We have plenty of space in our country, but insufficient jobs and insufficient resources to support everyone who wants to come here. When we see innocent children used as political pawns, it still tugs at our heartstrings, which is the desired intent. The real question is what are we going to do about it. The combination of immigration reform being a very tough issue as well as a political football has led to governmental stalemates and no useful solutions for decades.To begin to solve this problem, we must have some understanding of why it exists. Despite all of its problems, America is still the place of dreams. As such, it is small wonder that so many from other nations would like to live here. The benefits of an American domicile are so great that they outweigh issues of legality currently.Immigrating is relatively easy for those in proximity to the United States because we have very porous borders, and it is easy for illegals to hide and obtain fraudulent identification after they have penetrated the border. Although there is some fear of deportation, unenthusiastic and inconsistent enforcement of immigration laws is the expectation. Further incentives for illegal immigration are easy enrollment in public schools, easy employment for those willing to take jobs others don\u2019t want, easy access to health care and easy acquisition of public support through welfare programs. These and other inducements produce an osmotic effect that attracts ever more people to our land.Any discussion of immigration reform should include bipartisan solutions to these inducements. If these issues are not addressed, solutions will fall short. On the other hand, if all of these issues are addressed firmly and consistently, the osmotic effect will be reversed. Just as people found a way to get here, they will find a way to leave on their own and others will be less tempted to attempt illegal entry. Detractors will say that if it were that simple, it would have already been done and that we wouldn\u2019t be having this discussion. What they fail to account for is the fact that the issues have not been addressed.A national guest-worker program makes sense and seems to work well in Canada. Noncitizens would have to apply for a guest-worker permit and have a guaranteed job awaiting them. Taxes would be paid at a rate commensurate with other U.S. workers and special visas would allow for easy entry and egress across borders. Guest-worker status would be granted to individuals and not to groups. People already here illegally could apply for guest-worker status from outside of the country. This means they would have to leave first. They should in no way be rewarded for having broken our laws, but if they are wise, they will arrange with their employer before they leave to immediately offer them a legal job as soon as their application is received. When they return, they still would not be U.S. citizens, but they would be legal, and they would be paying taxes. Only jobs that are vacant as a result of a lack of interest by American citizens should be eligible for the guest-worker program.It is essential that employers bear some responsibility for making sure that no illegal immigrants are hired. Employers who break the rules should receive swift, severe and consistent punishment that constitutes a real deterrent and not a mere inconvenience. A second infraction should be a criminal offense and treated as such.All of this is irrelevant unless we have secure borders. There is much that can be learned from security personnel in prisons and other secured facilities, and there is a great deal of smart technology that can be employed to achieve secure borders. It is a matter of will rather than ability.As long as we reward people who break laws, they will continue to break laws. We do need a continual flow of immigrants, but choosers need not be beggars. We make decisions based on our needs. People who refuse to comply with the rules must forfeit chances of legalization in the future. Anyone caught involved in voter fraud should be immediately deported and have his citizenship revoked. The point is this: We must create a system that disincentivizes illegal immigration and upholds the rule of law while providing us with a steady stream of immigrants from other nations who will strengthen our society. Let\u2019s solve the problem and stop playing political football.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).There is no question that a free, honest and unbiased press is a great asset to any free and fair society. A press characterized by integrity demands answers to hard questions from everyone, regardless of political affiliation. When the press chooses sides, it enables those on the selected side to ignore rules and conduct themselves as they please, having no one to whom they must answer. Of course, this assumes that the populace is largely asleep at the wheel and not demanding objectivity in the press.Unfortunately, the \u201cmainstream media\u201d and the American people have conformed to this latter description in recent years, but I see signs of the people beginning to recognize the risks to both political and economic freedom imposed by the continuation of a journey down that pathway. Like politicians, the press no longer enjoys the almost unanimous trust it could once take for granted. What has caused so much of the press to become biased and agenda-driven, and why has the partiality become so blatant?I think the answer revolves around the fact that we as a nation are at a critical decision point. We are one or two national elections away from determining if we want to continue down the road toward \u201cutopia,\u201d where all of our basic needs are met from cradle to grave, the only price being total subservience to the government, or alternatively, to reverse direction and go back up the road toward personal responsibility and embrace the \u201ccan-do\u201d attitude and values that facilitated the rapid rise of America on the world stage.The proponents of each of these lifestyles are convinced that they are right, and it will be difficult to convince them otherwise. Since many so-called \u201cprogressives\u201d reject the traditional American way of life and wish to fundamentally change us, I think they have an obligation to fully engage in the debate about why their vision is better. Many of these liberals dwell in the mainstream media and seem reluctant to engage in serious conversation. Instead, they attempt to ask leading questions of their opponents, then distort the answers in an attempt to diminish their \u201cenemy\u201d in the eyes of the public. If they are successful, they never have to actually address the real issue for which they have no real answers.It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques of any media, and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.Over the past year, I have learned a great deal about the press in America. It is not uniformly unfair with nefarious agendas, but a significant portion is. One of the best ways to determine which news organization is objective and which has an agenda is to keep a scorecard that lists both electronic and print media. When evaluating a story, check off whether it is concentrating on factual reporting or demonization. If there is controversy, determine if both points of view are considered. If major stories of a political nature are ignored or barely mentioned, that should raise suspicions about objectivity.My emergence on the national political scene has produced great consternation for many in the media who adhere to the \u201cprogressive\u201d ideology. The fact that I had a very difficult upbringing and embraced the concept of personal responsibility and hard work, rather than dependency, directly opposes their narrative that people must depend on public support and must be loyal to the party that provides for their maintenance. In fairness to many of the liberals, because of that background and my storybooklike career in medicine, they considered me a brilliant role model and hero until it became clear that I rejected the liberal model of \u201csuccess.\u201d At that point, they assumed I was a pariah who could no longer think for himself and obviously was a tool of conservatives. If they just stop for a minute and thought about how silly that sounds, they might once again be able to find some noble bearings.Many have said to me that the mainstream media is hopelessly biased and cannot be reformed. I included an analysis of them in my latest book \u201cOne Nation,\u201d which is too extensive for this column, but the bottom line is this: No one is hopeless. We should continue to try to engage all media in conversations about important issues while rejecting their attempts at demonization and divergence. I think it is still possible for jaded members of the press to realize that they have a higher calling than blind and misguided loyalty to their chosen heroes, even at the risk of national destruction. Objective journalistic integrity can play a tremendous role in healing an ailing nation. The issues we face as a nation deserve the attention of rational, mature and objective individuals who have the courage to seek the truth, wherever it leads.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).My wife and I have been on a book tour by bus through several states recently, and I have been struck by the number of people who have already read \u201cOne Nation,\u201d but also by the large, enthusiastic crowds whose constituents include all political parties. People are concerned about our future as a nation and the poor prioritization of issues by our leaders, to put it mildly.We wrote \u201cOne Nation\u201d to try to convince our fellow Americans that \u201cwe the people\u201d are not each other\u2019s enemies and that our strength is derived from unity and common sense, which should be ubiquitous. The real enemies are the forces that are constantly trying to divide and conquer. They create divisions based on race, gender, age, education and, especially, income. It is important that we discuss who the purveyors of division are and what drives them to seek a radical alteration in the American way of life.We discuss the tools used to manipulate the populace into feeling that they should be offended so easily by words, while diverting their attention away from the real issues that desperately cry out for a solution. One of the major keys to avoiding manipulation is knowledge. Our system of government was designed for people who could easily understand the issues and vote intelligently based on knowledge, rather than blindly following political leaders who are often enshrouded with less-than-honorable motives.One of our major themes in the book is that knowledge is a formidable enemy of falsehood and a formidable ally of truth. There are specific steps that each of us can take, such as reading about something new for a half-hour every day for a year. Such a simple move will profoundly change the life of the reader and will vastly increase his effectiveness as an involved and responsible citizen.In today\u2019s world of widely disseminated information, one can become quite knowledgeable in a variety of areas quite rapidly, regardless of his occupation.The greatest concerns of people we are encountering on the road revolve around the future of their children and grandchildren as we continue along the path of government growth and escalating expenditure of taxpayer money, essentially ensuring that future generations have lives characterized by significantly reduced economic freedom.The lessons are abundant in America and throughout the world regarding the consequences of prolonged fiscal irresponsibility. Also, historical records are replete with accounts of the self-destruction of nations, driven by national debt. Many of our leaders are complacent about our precarious financial state because people seem more interested in reality shows on television and sporting events than with our imminent financial collapse. Once again, history informs us that national leaders seldom recognize and act upon economic warnings before disaster occurs.I think the majority of the American people know we are rapidly approaching the fiscal cliff and are concerned, but not panicked. It is not too late for people of all political stripes to put partisan bickering aside and join forces to combat the unsustainable debt that threatens our future. It is also not too late for responsible voters to notice which leaders refuse to seriously engage in such endeavors and to remove them from office.It doesn\u2019t matter to me that those who despise my warnings will say I\u2019m only promoting my book and trying to make money. From their perspective, they are probably incapable of understanding motives that would differ from theirs. Regardless of what they say, November 2014 will bring perhaps the most consequential midterm elections in history. Combined with the elections of 2016, \u201cwe the people\u201d will determine whether traditional American values and traditional interpretations of our Constitution are important to us or whether we prefer to continue down the path of ever-increasing government control of everything, including our lives. Books such as \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d will, by the grace of God, ensure that we go into that election process with our eyes open.Not only are there no enemies among us, we can and must come together to recapture the values that made us into an exceptional nation. We must use our intellect and energy to unleash the most powerful economic engine the world has ever known. Then we must concentrate on opening the pathways of personal empowerment to the millions of Americans who feel forgotten. Instead of restraining them in positions of dependency, we must provide clear pathways to self-improvement. We can help those who have made mistakes that make it difficult to pursue an education by providing a reasonable amount of money for day care.By demonstrating true compassion as dictated by Judeo-Christian values, we can make America a place of dreams and success for everyone. We must remember that freedom is not free, and all of us must be involved in its maintenance.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation: What We Can All Do To Save America\u2019s Future\u201d (Sentinel).More discussion on the topic of pragmatism and politics is critical. If conservatives decide to take their marbles and go home, rather than fight to the bitter end because they feel their principles have been compromised, they will needlessly subject future generations to untold misery.Voting for someone who agrees with you 90 percent of the time is far superior to voting for someone who disagrees with you 100 percent of the time. This is exactly what will happen if people refuse to exercise their civic duties and boycott elections because they feel betrayed. Personally, I am not supportive of abortion at all, but I can support people who feel differently, if, in the gigantic scheme of things, they can help put an end to the murder of innocent babies. This is especially true of those who are personally inclined to save and protect life.Perhaps an illustration is in order: Two armies are engaged in a war. Let\u2019s call the good army that is trying to defend an entire society the red army and the bad army that is trying to invade and pillage society the blue army. The blue army occupies a superior strategic position and is composed of slightly more troops, putting the red army at a distinct disadvantage. Some in the red army feel that they are right and, therefore, should simply march directly into battle with the blue army, because right always wins. Fortunately, some members of the red army are wise and have a better plan. They send a battalion of troops to the base of the mountain occupied by the blue army to distract them while the vast majority of red troops approach the mountain from the backside. They descend upon the blue army by surprise, completely vanquishing them and winning the war. The decoy red battalion may have sustained some casualties, but in the long run, the war was won, and the entire society was saved.I hope this illustration is useful in helping some to understand that reaching a critical mass of conservatives and RINOs (Republicans in Name Only, as some call them) in office, will help ensure that we can get nonactivist Supreme Court and federal judges in place who respect the U.S. Constitution. It is essential to achieve a critical mass of individuals in the U.S. House and Senate who can join with a president in upholding the Constitution. They must believe in personal responsibility and creating a business-friendly environment, understand the balance between abundant fossil-fuel development and environmental safety, and yearn to elevate the government-dependent 47 percent rather than make them more dependent. They must also be totally pro-life, and believe that the rule of law can undo a host of damaging regulations and restore the value system that made this nation great.In the long run, with the help of God, we will be in a position to save millions of babies who otherwise would be slaughtered. With this kind of responsible empowerment, energizing a sluggish economy, bringing stability to a leaderless planet, and facilitating innovation will not be that difficult. To sit helplessly by and pray for deliverance when the tools to achieve victory are in our hands is not useful. God helps those who help themselves.Conservatives and those who share their values are the last bastion between freedom and tyranny. If the secular liberals, who are very clever, succeed in dividing us during the next two national elections, America as we know it will be gone. We can stop this, but we must work together. I totally disagree with those who think it is going to take decades to undo the damage that has already been done. Americans are exceptional and extremely resilient. We cannot allow ourselves to be defined by those who wish to fundamentally change our society.I am thoroughly convinced that Americans with common sense will soon regain power in this nation. It is essential that we not use the opportunity to exact revenge upon the liberals. Rather we must govern by the Constitution in a way that is completely fair for all. It is not reasonable to have favorites and to enforce laws selectively. Most importantly, it is not the place of our government to rule the people, but rather the government must always remember that it is in place to serve the people. I firmly believe that when many individuals who were being manipulated by the secular liberals, including the media, have an opportunity to see how much better off they are when the proper relationship between the people and the government is restored, they will adopt a very different attitude. This will empower them and the entire nation.Now is the time to rise above partisan politics and recognize the incredible blessings God has bestowed upon our nation. It is time to elevate common sense, decency, honesty and compassion to their proper positions. Rather than simply repeat the words, we must actually achieve \u201cone nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.\u201dBen S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation\u201d (Sentinel).I was asked recently how I could possibly endorse the U.S. Senate candidacy of Monica Wehby, who is running as a Republican from Oregon. She is pro-choice, which in the opinion of many makes her unacceptable as a conservative.I called her to query her about her stance on this issue. She stated that personally, she is very pro-life, but she feels the government has no business interfering with the relationship between the mother, the baby, the doctor and God. I feel differently, because if abolitionists had taken a similar hands-off approach, I might not have been free to write this column. As someone who has spent a lifetime trying to save the lives of children, even with intrauterine surgery, it is probably not difficult to imagine why I am extremely oriented toward efforts to preserve human life, especially innocent human life that has yet to experience the extrauterine world.Given this pro-life propensity, one might ask, how could I endorse someone who is pro-choice? The answer is this: I\u2019m not an ideologue who determines a person\u2019s worthiness with a litmus test. I have known Dr. Wehby as a friend and colleague for many years, and she is extremely intelligent and knows how to make decisions based on evidence versus ideology. Also, in a state like Oregon, which is left-leaning, she would not be a viable candidate if she maintained a pro-life stance.If conservatives are going to win in 2014 and 2016 and preserve the environment of freedom to which we have grown accustomed, it will be necessary to learn how to prioritize issues. I am not saying that social issues are not important, but if the executive branch remains in the hands of those with \u201csecular progressive\u201d ideas in 2016, and two or three more Supreme Court justices with similar leanings are appointed, conservative social ideas will become anathema to the prevailing powers, who will use every tool available to them to silence such opposition.The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated in recent years on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or to assassinate their character.Sometimes it is not possible to go from a position of extreme weakness to one of great power in one fell swoop. We must realize that getting people into office who agree with us 90 percent of the time is far superior to ending up with someone who opposes you at every opportunity at the behest of their party leaders. With patience and good leadership, the 90 percenters can be moved in the right direction and will be great allies in redirecting our country toward common-sense solutions for our multitude of problems.The soul of America is at stake, and the future of our children and their children is threatened by unsustainable growing debt. Those who just listen to propaganda and refuse to read history or familiarize themselves with basic financial knowledge are easily fooled by those claiming that we are safe because our debt is rising slower. Those who go off the financial cliff die whether they fall one mile or 10 miles. The point is this: If the country is destroyed, many other issues become irrelevant. We need to stabilize the country first and then address the other serious problems.Although there now exists several variations on the best way to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), in the past there was much confusion. In the early 1960s, a mnemonic device called the ABCs of CPR was popularized and eliminated much of the confusion. The proper order of the procedure was easy to recall by remembering what each letter stood for. \u201cA\u201d was for \u201cairway,\u201d which can be quickly optimized. \u201cB\u201d was for \u201cbreathing\u201d to remind the rescuer of the importance of oxygenation, and \u201cC\u201d was for \u201ccirculation,\u201d which could be re-established by chest compression. For example, if chest compression is started in someone with an obstructed airway, it might prove less effective. By prioritizing the steps, many lives were saved.If the ship is about to suffer massive destruction by sailing over Niagara Falls, why devote energy scraping the barnacles off the bottom? There will be plenty of time for that once the ship is saved. Worrying about the barnacles before reversing course detracts from critical action. Enough said.This rationale will anger some who feel that their important issue, be it homosexual marriage, abortion, illegal immigration or Second Amendment rights should never be anywhere except front and center. I sympathize with those sentiments, but as a pragmatist, I realize that if conservatives continue to be fragmented over issues on which there will never be unanimous agreement, they will never get the chance to address these issues down the road. Principles are very important, but so are wisdom and savvy when building consensus with people with different kinds of principles.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the new book \u201cOne Nation\u201d (Sentinel).The recent escalating arguments over whether there should be further congressional hearings on Benghazi are quite troubling. The very fact that there are substantial numbers of people who feel that there is nothing more to investigate when four American lives were lost, and no one has answered for this crime, provides an indication of how far our sense of justice has slipped.This should not be a partisan issue, because the implications of ignoring or prevaricating about the underlying mistakes will have far-reaching consequences. The United States has diplomatic establishments throughout the world, and if these can be attacked without consequences, it greatly diminishes our influence and respect despite the protestations to the contrary by those who claim that there is no diminishing of our stature internationally.What does it say about our judgment if we have diplomatic establishments for which we make inadequate provisions for protection? This is especially disturbing since it has been revealed that requests by the consulate in Benghazi for more protection were refused. There had been attacks on our consulate not long before the fatal attack, and there had been hostile actions taken against the British, which they were wise enough to react to in appropriate fashion.Even more confounding was the decision to abandon our personnel at that consulate because someone decided that our military forces could not reach them in time to effect a rescue. How could such a decision have been made when no one knew how long the hostile action would last? Several military personnel who were in the area ignored orders to stand down and, instead, rushed to the consulate with assault weapons and resisted hostile forces long enough to allow some of their colleagues to escape, while sacrificing their own lives. Their heroic actions demonstrated the bravery and loyalty that characterizes American military forces. I feel certain that those men had no doubt in their minds that reinforcements were on the way, and that if they could just hold out long enough, their efforts would be rewarded.When our top officials make decisions to abandon our own people because they feel the situation is hopeless, they also abandon the concept of American exceptionalism and create doubt in the minds of all future military participants about the intention of their superiors to expend maximum effort to preserve their lives when they have sacrificed everything for our nation.Making mistakes is part of being human, but the ever-increasing deception that is necessary to cover those mistakes when honesty is abandoned is evil. Those willing to ignore evil for political reasons should question their fitness for leadership of our nation. In this case, a blatant falsehood was promoted, namely that the Obama administration had international terrorist activity directed at America under control, and that the Benghazi incident was a spontaneous action resulting from the outrage of locals who had viewed an offensive anti-Islamic video. Undue importance was placed on promoting an image of U.S. strength during the weeks immediately preceding the presidential election of 2012.Again, I must emphasize that if we, the American people, the American press and the American political class participate in the cover-up or ignore such an important story, we contribute to the demise of honesty and truth as pillars of our governing structure. In the book of Proverbs, King Solomon put it this way: \u201cIf a ruler listens to lies, those who serve him will be wicked.\u201dWe should also be very concerned about the attempt by some to ignore or downgrade the significance of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) scandal. The fact that something this contrary to the concept of freedom can happen in a country based on constitutional values and characterized as a \u201cphony scandal\u201d by people who supposedly have the best interests of this country at heart again points to the danger of placing partisan politics above truth and honesty.When politicians huddle and try to figure out ways to defend their leader or their party and ignore the well-being of their nation, the people must take notice and must do everything within their power to make sure that they are represented by those who share their beliefs, and not by those who are simply party loyalists.Obviously, the IRS was used in inappropriate ways or Lois Lerner would not have pleaded the Fifth Amendment. It is more than disturbing that the president of the United States and many in his party feigned outrage when the inappropriate actions of the IRS were initially exposed, but now cannot lend support to a full and unfettered investigation of activities that threaten the very liberty of the American people.A bipartisan group should investigate both Benghazi and the IRS scandal in a very transparent manner. If wrongdoing is discovered, those responsible must face consequences and procedures must be established to ensure that such abuses never occur again. Most importantly, the people must awaken and look objectively at the actions of both Democrats and Republicans and not simply accept what party leaders say. Freedom is not free, and vigilance associated with responsible voting is necessary to preserve it.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the forthcoming \u201cOne Nation\u201d (Sentinel, May 20).We recently learned that China is poised to replace the United States as the No. 1 economic power in the world sometime later this year. Our anemic quarterly growth rate of 0.1 percent certainly lends credence to this speculation. We must seriously question those who say our nation is not in decline. They are adopting the ostrich strategy and sticking their heads in the sand.There is no question that America is the pinnacle nation of the world currently and is likely to remain in that position for several years, given our military strength and the depth and stability of our financial infrastructure. However, overconfidence is the frequent companion of catastrophic decline, as confirmed by numerous historical writings. If we continue our fiscally irresponsible ways, coupled with our arrogance, there exists no other possibility than self-ruination.Our ability to print money is already in jeopardy as some other nations have begun making noises about altering the international reserve-currency system to emphasize multiple currencies, elevating their status and decreasing the strength of the U.S. dollar. Our ever-increasing national debt would then place us on shaky ground. The Treasury securities we have been offering to China and others would no longer hold the same appeal, and all the borrowing we have done against the financial well-being of our progeny will come back to plague us and them.Many who are responsible for putting us in this precarious position would argue that we really don\u2019t need to worry about countries such as China replacing us as the pinnacle nation in the world, because they have too many structural problems. For instance, China is far behind us in per-capita income, creating many social issues and negatively impacting growth of the middle class, which is the most effective growth engine.Their paucity of appropriate environmental controls has led to lethal industrial pollution, encouraging some of the intellectually gifted and mobile citizens to leave the country. China also has a very weak banking system, with too much government interference, which means their currency is unlikely to be accepted by the rest of the world as the reserve currency for many years. They could, however, recognize and correct these deficiencies more rapidly than expected, thereby enhancing their position as a formidable challenger to the United States.With Europeans intrigued by America\u2019s unexpected success, Alexis de Tocqueville carried out an in-depth study of the new nation in the 1830s. He was quite impressed by our divided government, which featured the separation of powers.This structure made it difficult for any one branch \u2014 executive, judicial or legislative \u2014 to acquire too much power and run roughshod over the other branches and the will of the American people. Unfortunately, today we are witnessing a largely unchecked executive branch issuing decrees that circumvent Congress while facing only tepid resistance.In civilian life, when a contract is entered into by two parties and it is subsequently discovered that one side knowingly presented false promises in order to consummate the deal, a legitimate lawsuit can be initiated on the basis of fraud. The Affordable Care Act is a prime example of such a contract in the form of a bill, which would never have been passed if it had been revealed that millions of people would lose their health insurance with which they were satisfied and that they would not be able to keep their doctor if they like their doctor, among other promises.Nevertheless, this massive case of fraud is not been legally challenged by the legislative branch, leaving one to wonder why.We hear a great deal about \u201cChicago-style politics.\u201d It is nothing more than a euphemism for political corruption, including bullying, blackmail and bribery. These pressures can be applied to national political figures just as easily as they can be to local politicians.Courage can be quite difficult to find when the threat of exposure hangs over one\u2019s head. In an age when Big Brother is capable of watching everything we do, it is not hard to imagine a scenario in which large numbers of public servants are silenced or subdued by secretive threats.I have had an opportunity to witness firsthand how the blackmail threat operates. Several years ago while I was in the operating room, I received a call from one of the legal offices at Johns Hopkins University informing me that the state of Florida was trying to attach my wages for child support.I was quite shocked at such an allegation and informed them that I had three children, which I already support very ably. They said a woman in Florida was accusing me of being the father of her son, and that she had proof of our relationship. The proof turned out to be knowledge of where I went to high school, college, medical school, and where I served my internship and residency. To top all that off, she had a picture of me in scrubs. I said anyone could obtain such information. However, the paternity suit was pursued, and I had to involve my personal lawyer.As the case advanced, I was asked to provide a blood specimen to facilitate DNA testing. I refused on the basis of the incompetence of any governmental agency that was willing to pursue a paternity suit on such flimsy grounds. I said that level of incompetence would probably result in my blood specimen being found at a murder scene and me spending the rest of my life in prison.Shortly thereafter, the suit was dropped with no further ramifications. I\u2019m virtually certain that the woman in Florida erroneously assumed that someone who travels as much as I do was probably engaging in numerous extramarital affairs and probably wouldn\u2019t even remember all the parties with whom he had been involved. Under such circumstances, she assumed that I would be willing to fork over the money to avoid public embarrassment.What she didn\u2019t know is that I did not have to scratch my head and try to remember which affair she represented, because I knew that the only woman I have ever slept with in my life was my wife. Even if that had not been the case, I think confession and dealing with the consequences would have been the best course of action.In the early history of America, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton was seduced by the wife of a political enemy with the intention of blackmailing him into complying with their wishes. Hamilton publicly confessed his transgression and the public forgave him, completely thwarting the plans of his adversaries.I think the American people are just as forgiving today if people are willing to be honest. With so much at stake regarding our country\u2019s future, I think now would be an excellent time to come clean for all national public figures who have been threatened by Chicago-style politics or who know that there are skeletons in their closet.If it\u2019s all done in a short time span, the media will be overwhelmed, and the people will quickly understand the extent of the disgusting and dishonest practices infesting the highest levels of government.Importantly, our public officials will be able to act with courage and conviction to rectify the corrupt practices that are all too readily ignored and threaten the moral fabric of our nation. I am confident that the American people will be both forgiving and grateful for the willingness of public figures to take a risk to preserve the American way of life.Story Continues \u2192The Bundy case in Nevada provides many insights into the state of our nation with respect to the relationship between the people and the government.The Bundys appear to be honorable American citizens without adequate legal counsel to help resolve a federal land issue about which they disagree with the Bureau of Land Management. Without question, they violated some of the innumerable laws and regulations that continue to entangle every aspect of American life.Their violations could certainly have been handled through a multitude of less brutal means than those employed by our federal government, which through the mouthpiece of Sen. Harry Reid emphasizes how important it is for the government to enforce its laws.PHOTOS: Conservatives in Hollywood: Celebrities who lean rightIt is quite interesting to see, though, that the same bureaucrats refuse to enforce some of our federal border-protection laws and other domestic policies with which they disagree. Perhaps Mr. Reid\u2019s time could be better spent explaining why it is acceptable for the federal government to pick and choose which laws it wishes to enforce.The senator readily referred to the Bundys and their supporters as \u201cdomestic terrorists,\u201d but the current administration is reticent about applying the same term to Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, who admitted slaughtering more than a dozen people in 2009 at Fort Hood in Texas. What does this tell us about our government and its perceptions and alignments?The massive show of federal force in the Bundy case is frightening because it gives us a brief glimpse of the totalitarian regime that awaits a sleeping populace that does not take seriously its voting responsibilities, and places in public office (and returns them to office) who do not represent traditional American values.PHOTOS: These pro-gun celebrities may shock youThe fact that the ranchers were well armed and willing to literally fight for their rights probably tempered the enthusiasm of the federal forces to engage in further aggression. It was clear from the body language and some of the reported verbal responses of the government forces that they were not prepared to engage in lethal combat with fellow Americans.Those Americans who are concerned about the possible future imposition of martial law after a financial collapse or some other event should take solace in knowing that many military and law enforcement personnel would likely refuse to obey commands inconsistent with freedom and American values. Such commands could emanate from any political party in the future, but it is likely that such a party would be one controlling an administration that selectively enforces laws and ignores or excuses corruption.Another important lesson from this incident is the value of a well-armed citizenry. The Second Amendment was crafted by wise citizens who recognized how quickly an enemy invasion could occur or how our own government could be deceived into thinking it had the right to dominate the people.Such domination is considerably more difficult when people have arms and can put up significant resistance. This is the reason that brutal dictators like Fidel Castro, Josef Stalin, Mao Zedong, Adolf Hitler and Idi Amin tried to disarm the populace before imposing governmental control. Such domination could occur in America in the not-too-distant future if we are not vigilant.We must be reasonable and willing to engage in conversation about how to limit the availability of dangerous weapons to criminals and very violent or insane people. In light of past worldwide atrocities committed by tyrants, though, to threaten the Second Amendment rights of ordinary American citizens is itself insanity. Those wishing to ban all assault weapons fail to understand the original intent of the Second Amendment.Just as insidious as the attempt to limit weapons and ammunition to law-abiding citizens is the incessant invasion of privacy by the government. Unless there is reasonable cause for suspicion as determined by a court of law, there is no need for the government to know all the intimate details of our lives, including who we talk to, where we spend our time and money, or which weapons we own, provided we\u2019re not purchasing tanks or fighter planes.For our nation to once again be a thriving metropolis of freedom and innovation, the people and the government must peacefully coexist in an atmosphere of trust and mutual respect. This can only occur when laws are equally enforced and political favors are a thing of the past. When obvious governmental corruption is discovered, it must be swiftly and openly dealt with, and the perpetrators must face easily verifiable punishment.This is just the opening salvo of what a trustworthy and honorable government should strive for. If we had such a government, border enforcement would be a given, the rights of the people would be respected, and events like the incident between the Bundys and the Bureau of Land Management would not occur.We the people of the United States are the only ones capable of preventing uncontrolled government expansion and abuse. Like the ranchers in Nevada, Americans must find the courage and determination to maintain a free and vibrant nation. Government should be our friend and ally. When it is, we should support it wholeheartedly.Story Continues \u2192In 1831, Alexis de Tocqueville, the famous French historian, came to America to study our nation. Europeans and others were fascinated by the success of the fledgling nation, then barely 50 years old and already competing on the world stage.Such a thing had never before occurred, and Tocqueville was determined to discover the secret. He was duly impressed by our governmental structure, including the separation of powers, but he was in awe of the public educational system, which rendered its recipients completely literate by the completion of second grade. This depth of education was generally only found among the aristocracy in Europe.Let\u2019s put aside the diversionary arguments about lack of educational access for all, which was a huge mistake, and concentrate on the tremendous advantage afforded our predecessors by education. Early settlers not only mastered reading, writing and arithmetic, but shared practical skills, all of which enabled them to traverse and tame a rugged and frequently hostile terrain from sea to shining sea.As isolated communities sprang up throughout the nation, they were able to thrive through innovation, industry and compassion. The \u201ccan-do\u201d attitude involved hard labor, but also included a sense of responsibility for those, who through injury or other hardships, could no longer care for themselves. The spirit of caring, although diminished, remains an important part of who we are today.Tocqueville was impressed by the fiery sermons that emphasized the word of God and not the social mores of the day. He concluded his American analysis by saying, \u201cAmerica is great, because America is good. If America ever ceases to be good, she will cease to be great.\u201d America was different because we openly acknowledged the role of God in our lives.Some will say, \u201cCarson is a religious fanatic because he believes in God and the Bible.\u201d Interestingly, the very same people are quick to invoke the name of God and recommend prayer at times of national and personal tragedy. Hypocrisy is their frequent companion.Some will say America can never make claims of \u201cgoodness\u201d owing it her history of slavery. Although it was by far the worst atrocity in our history, we paid a horrendous price in lives lost or destroyed in a Civil War that all but incapacitated a young nation. The guilt, shame and humility that resulted from this dark American episode will teach us and stigmatize us well into the future. Learning from mistakes is a sign of wisdom and goodness.What is disturbing in the pursuit of goodness is the turning of a blind eye toward corruption, much like the Romans did before the fall of their empire. Episodes such as the Internal Revenue Service scandal should alarm all Americans, regardless of political affiliation. The fact that one party has characterized it as a \u201cphony scandal\u201d tells you a great deal about the loss of honesty in our society.The fact that one party is willing to use its majority status to cram a health care bill down the throats of the minority party and the American people, and then refuses to acknowledge the obvious illegitimacy of a bill largely passed on the basis of false information provides a barometer on the lack of importance placed on virtue in our society today. How can such a society in any way claim to be good?How can a society that kills millions of innocent unborn babies and then labels anyone opposing the practice as \u201canti-woman\u201d claim even a modicum of goodness? How can a nation that uses its news media to subtly trash traditional families, promote a drug-filled lifestyle, and ridicule faith in God claim the mantle of righteousness?I could go on pointing out how far we have strayed from our Judeo-Christian roots. For some, such a departure cannot come soon or dramatically enough. However, I believe the majority of Americans understand that we are different from everyone else, and that difference had a great deal to do with our rapid rise to the pinnacle of world power and wealth.As we depart from our former values of decency, honesty, compassion and fairness, our status as a blessed nation will also be diminished.Our decline is not necessary if we can learn from the mistakes of others and reclaim the values upon which our nation was built. I am not advocating for a national religion, but I do think we should seriously consider the words of John Adams, who said, \u201cOur Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate for the government of any other.\u201dAmerica can be great, but it requires real courage and conviction to resist the urge to be \u201ccool.\u201d None of this means we should impose Judeo-Christian values on those who wish to adopt a different kind of lifestyle, but it does mean that we should not allow an alternative lifestyle to be imposed upon us.Fairness is a two-way street, and so is tolerance. If the majority refuses to fight for its rights while a vocal minority uses a compliant media to try to fundamentally change America, we will have only ourselves to blame.Story Continues \u2192Imagine a situation in which there is an earthquake that destroys a suspension bridge over a deep canyon.A passenger train is speeding toward the location, and those in charge realize that there is a potential problem ahead, but choose instead to argue over the ambient temperature in the passenger cars, the food service and whether they will reach their final destination on time. A few people are quite disturbed when they learn of the tragedy about to unfold if the train isn\u2019t halted, but they are labeled as \u201calarmists\u201d who really are not sophisticated enough to understand the situation.Obviously, I am referring to our nation and the impending disaster that awaits us if we continue on a course of ever-expanding government control of our lives, fiscal irresponsibility, unwise energy policies and a laissez-faire attitude regarding our world leadership responsibilities.Conservatives and other thinking individuals must recognize that we are in dire straits. They must adopt a sense of urgency in order to prevent irreparable damage to the concept of a nation where people are free to pursue their dreams without interference \u2014 as long as they are not harming others.They should not be arguing among themselves over petty differences and refusing to support individuals who largely agree with them about the direction of the country, but perhaps have some disagreements about issues that can easily be resolved after the disaster has been averted.It is troubling to see members of the Tea Party being attacked by establishment conservatives, and vice versa. If they get angry when their candidate loses in a primary race and refuse to support the winner, they are playing right into the hands of the progressives, from whom they could learn much.Currently, there are two major visions for America. Liberals envision an overarching central government that controls all the resources and ensures \u201cequitable\u201d redistribution in a way that prevents anyone from suffering hardship, regardless of their lifestyle and life choices.The conservative vision emphasizes personal responsibility and a governmental role confined by the U.S. Constitution. This is the vision that was embraced by our Founders.The liberal vision, however, seems to be rapidly gaining momentum, even though many of its proponents would argue either that the government really is not trying to take control, or that authority is a necessary function in its role of determining qualifications for licenses, setting standards and determining such things as age requirements for public school attendance.These big-government proponents also argue that Obamacare is no more intrusive on our freedoms than other forms of government regulation. This indicates a lack of understanding of the liberal nature of governmental control, which eventually results in authoritarian oversight of virtually every aspect of our lives. By encircling businesses, educational institutions and health care enterprises with massive regulatory shackles, the government will eventually be able to shut down virtually any entity that refuses to cooperate with its mandates.For example, recently, the last lead-smelting plant in the United States was shut down by the Environmental Protection Agency for violating some of those regulatory shackles. That certainly could be seen as a victory for some who are interested in decreasing the amount of ammunition available to gun owners.Putting the Internal Revenue Service in charge of enforcement of components of Obamacare establishes a situation where the most feared government agency is empowered to wreak havoc on the lives of citizens who express dissent. It is quite astonishing that many are unable to fathom this danger and thus dismiss it \u2014 much like those in charge of the passenger train speeding toward danger.Liberals have just as many disagreements among themselves as conservatives. Still, in order to accomplish their goals, they have learned to put aside their differences and create large, loyal voting blocs. Sometimes, they make empty promises, but by repeating them often, people actually believe that they are benefiting when, in fact, the opposite may be occurring.Liberals appear to be quite comfortable with a health care bill that was passed with obvious deceit emanating from the highest levels of government. Very much like the radical Islamists who believe any means is acceptable to accomplish their goals, many in the liberal movement are willing to relegate to the sidelines the Judeo-Christian values that so rapidly elevated our country.Conservatives shouldn\u2019t emulate this deception, but they ought to learn to present a united front to harness the power and energy necessary to reverse the downward spiral of the greatest nation in the history of the world.Story Continues \u2192Divide and conquer is an age-old strategy, effectively used by many in positions of power to ensure that they retain their wealth and authority.During the dark days of slavery in America, there were many geographic areas where the number of slaves significantly surpassed the number of whites and slave owners.This occasioned appropriate anxiety for the owners, who cleverly sowed seeds of discord among the different groups of slaves in an attempt to effectively destroy unity. For example, field slaves were told that the house slaves thought of themselves as superior.This worked in most cases, although there were notable instances of secret cooperation between the slaves to accomplish various goals. It required real wisdom and insight to avoid easy manipulation by the slave owners, who usually used slaves loyal to them to accomplish their nefarious objectives.In today\u2019s culture, there are political forces that see the descendants of slaves as useful objects for maintaining their positions of wealth and power. By promising to care for their every need, they create dependency.Frightening those dependents into thinking that they will be abandoned if others are in control, they create loyalty that is undeserved but fierce \u2014 loyalty that translates into the real goal: votes. Anything or anyone that threatens this paradigm of victim and protector must be destroyed, lest the victims recognize the deceitfulness of their manipulators and revolt.The most dangerous people to the modern manipulators are people who have freed themselves from the plantation mentality. They eschew the propaganda of victimhood and advocate for personal responsibility. They see the true compassion of a hand up rather than a handout.The tragedy is that many \u201cleaders\u201d of the black community succumb to the mesmerizing poison of the controlling elites, who make them feel \u201ccool\u201d and important. I\u2019m sure that some actually realize what is happening, but \u2014 like the kids you remember in high school \u2014 don\u2019t want to risk being ostracized and expelled from the \u201cin crowd,\u201d and, therefore, remain silent.It is so important for the black community to realize that there is tremendous strength in unity and that a disagreement on some issues does not have to create animosity. In fact, by engaging in open discussions rather than demonization, a great deal can be learned by all parties.I am a registered independent, but I have many friends who are Democrats and many who are Republicans. One friend who identifies himself as a Democrat left Alabama at age 16 heading to Boston in search of employment. He accidentally ended up in Hartford, Conn., and worked in a lowly position as a construction aide for a hotel that was being built. This young black man from Birmingham had a strong work ethic and was gifted with common sense.Today, he not only owns that hotel, but owns many other businesses and is a philanthropist. We do not disagree about most important things, but have some political disagreements, which have no negative impact on our friendship or our ability to work together on joint projects. If someone tried to exploit our differences, we would have a hearty laugh at their expense.Those who spew venom at black conservatives would do well to read about the lives and philosophies of such luminaries as Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman and many others, who refused to subscribe to the victim mentality.They should make an attempt to understand what it takes to ascend from the lifestyle of Southern sharecroppers to the office of secretary of state of the United States of America.Perhaps then, they would rally to the side of Condoleezza Rice, who achieved this and much more, including concert pianist. When the black community tolerates a group of liberal Rutgers professors who succeeded in disinviting her to their commencement because she is a black conservative, they embolden the controlling elites and dramatically minimize accomplishments that any ethnic group should be proud of.We must fight for the precious hearts and souls of all of our young people. We have to give them the \u201ccan-do\u201d attitude that characterized the rapid ascension of America. We must defang the dividers by ignoring them and thinking for ourselves.Story Continues \u2192While the media have been focused on the missing Malaysian aircraft, massive alterations in the world\u2019s geopolitical terrain are underway simultaneously.The annexation of Crimea by Russia should not have been a surprise for anyone who suspects that President Vladimir Putin is trying to re-establish a powerful Soviet-style empire. When he aggressively attacked Georgia in 2008 after both Georgia and Ukraine failed to obtain NATO admission at the Bucharest Summit, we should have realized that his goals were not limited to one territory. I suspect that he is now calculating an excuse to occupy the easiest regions of Ukraine first and then the whole country over time.The United States encouraged Ukraine to give up its nuclear arsenal and to de-emphasize its military complex, but in its moment of dire need for tangible support, will we have the courage and fortitude to help stop Russian aggression, which can ultimately lead to another Cold War or worse?Many have probably forgotten the worldwide turmoil created during the Cold War, which ended a quarter-century ago. Allowing conditions to mature that might re-create another dominant world power hostile to the United States could easily reinforce those radical elements who wish to see the demise of this nation. One of the ways we permit such conditions to arise is through our fiscal irresponsibility, which substantially weakens us because the borrower is subservient to the lender. Can we be objective in our treatment of nations, no matter what their actions, if we owe them great sums of money?Ronald Reagan facilitated the demise of the former Soviet Union without firing a single shot. He enacted policies that resulted in a financial meltdown that ended the brutal Soviet reign. The recent precipitous fall of the Russian stock market cannot go unnoticed by Mr. Putin, and more financial pressure applied immediately could give pause to his grandiose schemes. We could freeze Russian financial assets, downgrade trade associations or rapidly establish energy production policies to free the European Union from the Russian energy stranglehold.EU energy freedom would require the quick establishment of a rational energy development platform that does not cater to the far-left environmentalists. Many advocates of common sense are also very concerned about the environment but are reasonable enough to realize that rather than using Environmental Protection Agency regulations to stifle abundant energy production, we can use the EPA in conjunction with the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship to produce and export a vast amount of clean energy. This could vastly improve our bargaining position throughout the world.Whether we are experiencing global warming or a coming ice age, which was predicted the 1970s, we as responsible human beings must be concerned about our surroundings and what we will pass on to future generations. However, to use climate change as an excuse not to develop our God-given resources makes little sense. Expanding our wealth of energy resources, as well as encouraging development of new renewable energy sources, can provide an enormous economic lift with obvious benefits, but it can also bolster our role as a formidable player in the struggle for world leadership.The rapidly changing geopolitical scene cannot be successfully managed by leading from behind. We need to put aside partisan ideological bickering and use our collective knowledge and wisdom to thwart the redevelopment of a powerful and dangerous rival for global influence. Perception is reality, and it is crucial that we not be seen as timid and waffling during the opening moves of this strategic chess match.Our allies must know that we have their backs when they get into difficult situations, and our support must be pronounced and immediate. If we call upon independent nations such as Ukraine to abandon their most potent weapons of defense and then only lend tepid support when their independence is threatened, we would be foolish to believe that others in the world are not observing our behavior. Consistent reliability and strong support in these matters will lead to strong support when we call upon our allies to join us in employing economic leverage against rogues who threaten world peace.Americans should be supportive and encouraging to our leaders during times of international crises, but let\u2019s hope they are listening to voices from all major parties about the ramifications of each option available to us in this fight. Let\u2019s further hope that they can see the big picture and understand the importance of using all of our resources, including natural energy, to achieve our objectives. Developing our natural energy resources, controlling our national debt, consistently supporting our allies, and aggressively opposing our foes without playing politics will help improve our status in the world and make peace more likely. The stakes are too high to simply be reactive. We must act if we are to lead.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and author of the forthcoming \u201cOne Nation\u201d (Sentinel, May 20).When I was in high school in Detroit, there was a great deal of emphasis on clothing.As I became increasingly interested in fitting in with the \u201cin crowd,\u201d fashion supplanted academic achievement in my hierarchy of importance. My grades plummeted and I became a person who was less pleasant and more self-absorbed.My mother was very disappointed, because she thought I had enough insight and intelligence to avoid the flypaper trap of acting like everyone else.Fortunately, after wasting a year pursuing acceptance, I realized that my dreams went far beyond silk shirts and sharkskin pants. I decided to forsake the \u201cin crowd\u201d and redoubled my academic efforts in time to rescue my sinking grade-point average and gain admission to an Ivy League university.To say that the \u201cin crowd\u201d was disgruntled when I abandoned their association would be a gross understatement. It eventually became clear to them that I would not rejoin their ranks under any circumstances, and they left me alone.As a teenager, I began a new, lifelong routine of starting and ending each day reading from the book of Proverbs, which, of course, was written by Solomon, a very wise man.Interestingly, my parents were led to give me the middle name of Solomon \u2014 not that I claim even a modicum of his wisdom.After Solomon became the king of Israel, he gained great renown when two women came before him claiming to be the mother of the same infant.Solomon decreed that the baby should be divided and half given to each woman, at which time the real mother immediately relinquished her clai m.This made the judgment quite simple. I believe God has a sense of humor, not only because of my middle name and my affinity for Solomonic Proverbs, but because I, too, gained great renown by dividing babies. In my case, it was complexly joined craniopagus twins.One of the verses that seems very pertinent to America today is Proverbs 22:7, which says, \u201cThe rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.\u201dMost of us grew up hearing that debt is a very bad thing. The advent and wide dissemination of credit cards diminished such teachings, and those in charge of our nation\u2019s finances over the past few decades seem to revel in debt.As a nation, we currently are carrying a national debt of $17.5 trillion. If we repaid it at a rate of $10 million per day, seven days a week, 365 days per year, it would take 4,700 years to repay.The only reason that we can sustain such a level of debt is our status as the international reserve currency for the world.This is a position usually reserved for the most reliable and strongest economic nation, and this status allows us to print money. If Greece could print money, it would not be bankrupt, although it would probably continue to drive up its debt.Additionally, we have unfunded liabilities of at least $100 trillion.Why am I concerned about this? I have been talking about this issue since long before Russian President Vladimir Putin\u2019s recent threat to abandon the U.S. dollar as Russia\u2019s reserve currency.Unless he could attract many other nations to do the same, he would likely inflict more short-term damage on his own country than on the United States.Nevertheless, the very mention of such an action should send shivers down our spine. He recognizes our vulnerable position, which is exacerbated by our insistence on incurring unsustainable levels of debt. I have no doubt that at a strategic moment, he will exploit our weakness.A United Nations committee in 2010 recommended a change in world reserve currency policies, and others such as China have made similar suggestions. They are beginning to doubt the stability of America\u2019s financial infrastructure.Story Continues \u2192As a child, I was attracted to anything that dealt with medicine. Many stories featured Johns Hopkins Hospital, and I was eventually privileged to spend 36 years at Johns Hopkins working with brilliant and caring colleagues who dedicated their lives to the art and science of healing.After a storybook career that included thousands of operations and many sleepless nights, I looked forward to retirement, thinking that it would be quite relaxing.However, life throws many curveballs, and sometimes the ordering of our steps is not of our own choosing. I now find myself deeply immersed in trying to heal the health care environment, because if you cure the organism and put it back into a sick environment, you really have not accomplished very much.Recently, I was giving a speech in Sikeston, Mo., where I had the opportunity to be reacquainted with a 21-year-old man, T.J. He likes to go fishing and play cards with his friends, and to a stranger, he sounds like a pretty regular 21-year-old. However, T.J. has lived anything but a regular life.At just nine months of age, he was diagnosed with an aggressive brain tumor. His mother was told not to expect him to see his second birthday. This is news that no mother should have to hear.After 17 surgeries \u2014 seven of which I performed in a relatively short period of time \u2014 T.J. was finally out of the woods. Through a combination of Providence and the marvels of modern medicine, T.J. survived this ordeal, and it was quite an experience to get to see him and his dedicated family again.I share this story to help explain why I have decided to become chairman of the Save Our Healthcare Project, which has been organized by a group called the American Legacy PAC.Our mission is to lead a national citizens\u2019 effort to hold Washington accountable, re-center the health care debate around doctors and patients, and begin the process of replacing Obamacare with patient-centered reforms that will allow every American access to the best, most affordable care in the world.If you would like to join us, please visit SaveOurHealthcare.org.I believe a nationwide effort such as this is vital because, as much as I have been privileged to treat people such as T.J., I am but one person \u2014 and both the problems and the solutions to our health care woes are bigger than any one person.As we move forward, we will seek to underscore two points that have gotten lost in the daily back-and-forth over broken websites, increased premiums and dropped coverage.First, the underlying and unfixable flaw of Obamacare is that it goes against all the lessons of human history and puts its trust in a centralized bureaucracy instead of free individuals. Second, repealing Obamacare is not an end in itself.Those of us who believe in the Constitution, free enterprise and individual freedom have an absolute responsibility to provide the country with a new and better direction, and that is what we intend to do.From my experience, I know that nothing is more personal than health care. After all, it\u2019s about the health of the people we love and care about. Every step in the direction of centralization is a step away from personalization.I steadfastly believe that no centralized bureaucracy and no politician \u2014 Republican or Democrat \u2014 should ever get in the way of decisions best made by patients, families and doctors.Story Continues \u2192Most of us can remember feeling that someone had done us a great injustice. On those occasions, we want nothing more than to exact revenge. I remember being unfairly treated as a lowly ROTC cadet by one of the sergeants who resented the fact that my brother had been promoted to captain and company commander over him.I was very ambitious and worked extremely hard, resulting in my promotion in record time to the rank of colonel and city executive officer. This individual was now firmly under my command and I could have wreaked havoc in his life. Instead, I chose to give him extra responsibilities. Responding to the challenge, he proved himself to be quite capable, earning further promotions. Because I resisted the urge to retaliate, we both won. This same principle can apply in politics.Unfortunately in the past, we have been a reactionary country, resulting in political shifts back and forth from left to right without a lot of forward progress. After attaining power, both sides act in ways that are less than honorable, but they justify their actions by citing similar transgressions performed by the other side. This immature behavior is vividly exhibited by President Obama in his shameless use of executive orders to try to force the eventual success of Obamacare.Administration supporters defend his strategy by pointing out that previous presidents have even more executive orders than Mr. Obama. It\u2019s like saying that punching someone 40 times is more harmful than shooting him four times. However, it\u2019s not the quantity of executive orders that matters, but their impact.There are always some people who attempt to pick apart an analogy, but most readers will see the point. In the current controversy, a massive, politically motivated government program was forced on half of the population with their opinions completely disregarded. No legislation of this magnitude had ever before been passed in the history of the United States by one party with unanimous opposition by the other party. Each executive order to sustain Obamacare is like pouring salt in a wound. Furthermore, the concept of seeking common ground is further damaged.When the political pendulum swings again, which I predict will begin this November, it is imperative for the sake of our progeny that those in power act like \u201cthe adults in the room\u201d and govern in a lawful and constitutional manner. This means refraining from the use of excessive government interference in choosing winners and losers. It also means an evenhanded enforcement of all of our laws rather than repeating the Obama administration\u2019s practice of selective law enforcement. Adult governance is founded upon objectivity, not ideology.The American people have suffered through decades of power-drunk politicians, many of whom practiced deceitful manipulation. This has caused tens of millions of Americans to abandon their duties in disgust as informed and responsible voters, which only makes the situation worse.I have encountered an extremely large number of elderly people who have told me that they have given up on the United States and are simply waiting to die. This is the reason that more eligible voters did not vote in the last presidential election than actually voted for either candidate. Many of these people are members of \u201cthe greatest generation\u201d and they fought very tangible and visible forces that threatened our freedom. The forces facing us now are less tangible, but are nevertheless at least as lethal to our way of life.Despite all the naysayers on both sides, I am convinced by the people I encounter on the speaking circuit that common sense, honest and fairness for all can return to the corridors of power in America. We can govern in a manner that not only re-engages millions, but provides liberty and justice for all.As it was in the days of the Founders before the American Revolution, now it is necessary for ordinary Americans to engage their neighbors, friends and colleagues in serious discussions about what kind of nation they want to pass on to their children and grandchildren. It is important that everyone knows who represents them both at the state level and at the national level. The party affiliation of those representatives is not nearly as important as their voting record. Every American, regardless of their political affiliation, must distinguish those who represent the free-enterprise system based on personal responsibility and equal treatment from those who are willing to give away our personal freedom in order to enhance the size and scope of the government.The power to reverse the deterioration of our nation is within the hands of \u201cwe the people.\u201d We must realize that our countrymen are not our enemies, and we must understand that we cannot rely on many in the media and in politics to tell us the truth. We need to go beyond them and rely on ourselves to craft a truly free America that works for all of us. This means we must become informed voters and use our votes effectively to choose the kind of leadership that truly represents the will of the people.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.As a child growing up in Detroit and Boston, I had many opportunities to experience the ugly face of racism and witnessed the devastating toll exacted by its mean-spirited nature.I was a victim of the racism of low expectations for black children, but in retrospect, I can see that many of those attitudes were based on ignorance.Large numbers of white people actually believed that blacks were intellectually inferior, and there were a host of other inaccurate beliefs that whites held about blacks and that blacks held about whites.It is very likely that many of those misperceptions would have persisted if measures had not been taken to abolish the separation of the races. One of these measures was affirmative action, which was based on the admirable concept that we should take into consideration inherent difficulties faced by minorities growing up in a racist society.I certainly believe that I benefited from affirmative action. When I applied to Yale University, I thought my chances of being accepted were favorable only because I was somewhat naive about admission requirements for a high-powered Ivy League institution.I graduated third in my high school class rather than the top, largely because my sophomore year was a total waste after I got caught up in the negative aspects of peer pressure and abandoned my studies for the sake of social acceptance.I had a very healthy grade-point average by the time I graduated, and one of the Detroit newspapers printed an article that stated I had the highest SAT scores of any student graduating from the Detroit public schools in 20 years. I was also the city executive officer for the ROTC program and had a long list of extracurricular activities.In my mind, I was pretty hot stuff. Only after I got to Yale and became cognizant that many of my classmates were equally accomplished did I realize that the admissions committee had taken a substantial risk on me and that I had been extended special consideration.My early academic experiences were traumatic, and but for the grace of God, I would have flunked out.Fortunately, I was able to adjust to the academic rigors necessary to qualify for medical school admission at the University of Michigan. Medical school was very transformative, and I was subsequently accepted into the very selective neurosurgical residency at Johns Hopkins.By that time, no special considerations were expected or needed.Today, there are many young people from a variety of racial backgrounds who are severely deprived economically and could certainly benefit from the extension of a helping hand in education, employment and other endeavors.Such extra consideration is actually helpful to all of us as a society. For each individual we prevent from going down the path of underachievement, there is one less person who will likely need support from governmental entitlement programs. More importantly, there is one more person who may make substantial contributions that benefit mankind.The real question is this: Who should receive extra consideration from a nation that has a tradition of cheering for the underdog? My answer to that question may surprise many, but I believe underdog status is not determined any longer by race.Rather, it is the circumstances of one\u2019s life that should be considered.Story Continues \u2192We used to characterize the Soviet Union as a godless, evil empire. Like many societies before them that were based on communism or socialism, the Soviets had seen fit to minimize the importance of God and, in many cases, wreaked unimaginable persecution on religious people.Why is faith in God anathema to such states? It\u2019s because they need to remove any authority beside themselves as the arbiter of right and wrong.Interestingly, last year Russian President Vladimir Putin criticized Euro-Atlantic countries, including the United States, of becoming godless and moving away from Christian values.Some may bristle at such an accusation, but when you now consider that many Americans are hesitant to even mention God or Jesus in public, there may be some validity to his claim.We have also casually tossed out many of the principles espoused in the Bible and have concluded that there\u2019s no authority greater than man himself.The famous Boston Tea Party involved disgruntled colonists who felt unfairly treated by the British Motherland, which was imposing an ever-increasing burden of taxation with little or no input from those being taxed.The British reasoned that they were offering protection to the colonies and, therefore, the taxes were justified.Because the British Empire was almost continuously expanding and engaging in warfare, a great deal of revenue was required. There appeared to be enormous natural resources and the capacity to develop them in the New World, and the monarch thought these could provide an endless source of revenue.There was no consideration of the fact that the colonists worked hard to sustain themselves and also wanted to accumulate enough wealth to provide for their later years and for their families.Interestingly, the much-maligned Tea Party of today faces the same concerns as the brave pioneers of old. They are also concerned about government overreach with programs such as Obamacare, unnecessary and unlawful surveillance of citizens, blatant and unchecked abuse by the Internal Revenue Service, and government cover-ups and media complicity.Neither did the Boston Tea Party\u2019s participants, nor supporters of the modern Tea Party object to paying their fair share of taxes, but both witnessed an incessant escalation of government spending, which was always taken out of their hides.The concept of cutting back on government expenditures was as foreign to the British as it is to our government today, which provides lip service but no meaningful action.Why do so many members of the political class go to such great lengths to demonize the Tea Party?It is not a sophisticated political organization, but rather consists of a loosely knit group of American citizens from many backgrounds who are not ready to relinquish the power of the people into the hands of government entities whose interests and values do not seem to coincide with theirs.I think it is because certain politicians have forgotten that they work for us rather than the other way around. These politicians are deeply offended by anyone who would dare challenge their \u201cwisdom\u201d and authority.Recently, a prominent senator publicly spoke out in favor of efforts to crush groups such as the Tea Party, which is considered by those like him to be troublemakers, rather than agents of free speech.This kind of attitude has not been denounced by the Obama administration, and it is antithetical to the principles of freedom of speech and freedom of expression, which were once regarded as precious in America.As we approach the national elections of 2014 and 2016, the Tea Party and all other groups who respect the Constitution and our Judeo-Christian heritage should put aside minor differences and issues that can be addressed later and present a united front of common sense to combat forces that wish to fundamentally change America.These forces will make every attempt to magnify a host of social issues upon which legitimate differences will always exist. Our entire social system is people-centric, rather than government-centric.Those who truly understand this will not fall easy prey to those who wish to distract and divide them on these issues. We who think logically will not be shaken by those who say, \u201cThese are not minor issues.\u201d We realize that they are simply up to their old tricks in an attempt to maintain their power.Story Continues \u2192There has been much discussion about income inequality recently. President Obama seems to think that we can make significant progress in eliminating poverty by raising the minimum wage, as his State of the Union address highlighted.Many hope that through a simple declaration, the poor can be elevated to a higher social status. Such people fail to realize that pay is associated with value \u2014 otherwise, we could just pay everybody $1 million a year and let everybody be rich.In a capitalistic society, those individuals who produce the wherewithal to obtain income tend to be paid quite handsomely, while individuals who don\u2019t generate significant income are paid accordingly.\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: Obama pushes minimum-wage hike during Costco visit\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tAs in any situation that involves human beings, there will be some abuses, but generally speaking, this kind of system works by incentivizing individuals to do the things necessary to enhance their value in the marketplace.Many in the current administration and their sycophants in the news media are trying to persuade Americans that there is significant improvement in the general economy, while record numbers of people are enrolling in the food-stamp program and receiving various government subsidies.Several years ago, I was consulted by a young woman who was 33 weeks pregnant and was on her way to Kansas get an abortion. I informed her of the multiple options available to her outside of abortion and she decided to go through with the pregnancy even though the child had hydrocephalus and required neurosurgical intervention after birth a few weeks later. She kept the baby and loves the beautiful child that has resulted.A couple of decades ago, I came into the pediatric Intensive Care Unit on morning rounds and was told about a four-year-old girl who had been hit by an ice cream truck, and was comatose and exhibiting little neurological function other than reactive pupils. I tested her pupillary reflexes and both pupils were fixed and dilated. The staff indicated to me that this is something that must have just occurred. I grabbed the bed and with some help, transported her quickly to the operating room for an emergency craniotomy. I was met along the way by a senior neurosurgeon who told me I was wasting my time and that at best, we would end up with someone in a vegetative state.Nevertheless, we completed the operation and a few days later, her pupils became reactive and she eventually left the hospital. I saw her a few years ago walking through the hospital with her own 4-year-old little girl. She was neurologically fully intact and told me she had become somewhat of a celebrity because of the experience I just related. What do these two stories have in common? They both involve precious lives that could easily have been discarded.My entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I have personally met several people who have told me that their mothers had considered abortion, but happily decided against it.Most of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are very poignant and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \u201cendangered\u201d insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying that we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals. Rather I am saying shouldn\u2019t we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?When I was in high school in Detroit, I had a job as a biology laboratory assistant. I spent a substantial amount of time in the greenhouse, preparing botany experiments. I had acquired some seeds of an interesting plant and was anxious to use them to produce my own crop of these plants. I planted the seeds in a special container and kept enriching the soil and providing plenty of moisture and sunlight to enhance and accelerate the growth. I was very disappointed with the results and eventually abandoned the project, leaving the seeds in some soil behind the greenhouse to fend for themselves.To my surprise, one day when I was behind the greenhouse, I discovered that the seeds had not only germinated, but had produced a substantial crop without my help. I realize that no analogy is perfect and that many people will try to discredit the analogy, but in this case, I believe the seed is similar to America when it was a fledgling group of colonies. Many people came to America from other countries because they saw an opportunity to lead the life of their choice without a lot of interference from an overarching governing structure.Although there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order, and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People were largely left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.Government plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and devote little personal responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families. In the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens. This scenario is well-known to historians, who realize that bureaucracy begets more bureaucracy. It is incredibly rare \u2014 if not unheard of \u2014 for bureaucratic agencies to conclude that they have grown too big and need to be reduced.It\u2019s not that people who work in the government are bad people, but rather there is a natural tendency for government to grow. Our Founders feared this, and they included measures that we are now ignoring to restrain the growth and power of the central government. Just as I was meddling with the natural growth of those seeds, constant interference in Americans\u2019 business by government stifles economic growth, creativity and entrepreneurship. The early settlers of this country had very limited government support, yet prosperous towns sprang up all over the country. In many cases, entrepreneurs became very wealthy, and that wealth begat wealth and opportunities for others.A few years ago, I was participating in a national radio interview when the questioner asked me, \u201cDr. Carson, I notice that you don\u2019t speak very often about race. Why is that?\u201dI replied, \u201cIt\u2019s because I\u2019m a neurosurgeon.\u201dThe puzzled look on her face demanded further clarification.I proceeded to explain that when I take a patient to the operating room and open the cranium, exposing the brain, I am operating on the actual thing that makes that person who they are.The hair, scalp and skull bones are merely external coverings of the critical entity \u2014 namely, the brain \u2014 which determines all the most important things about us as human beings.Earlier this year, one of the mainstream media networks was planning to do a special on my retirement from neurosurgery. They recorded a lecture that I gave at my medical school, as well as one given at a high school in Detroit. They also accompanied me to my old neighborhoods, where many of the neighbors came out to greet me and talk about old times. I was struck by some of the comments I heard, including the notion that I always had lofty dreams that seemed unrealistic, but that others enjoyed hearing about anyway. Someone else told me that they would always murmur among themselves when I was coming, \u201cHere comes Mr. Know-It-All. Let\u2019s get out of here.\u201d For some reason unknown to me, the network decided not to air the special, but it was still a valuable opportunity for me to catch up with old acquaintances. Similarly, some years ago, I attended the 25th reunion of my high school graduating class. The thing that struck me the most was the fact that many of the \u201creally cool\u201d guys were dead. Many of my other classmates told me how proud they were of my accomplishments and asked me if I remembered how they used to encourage me. Of course I did not, because no such encouragement took place, but people\u2019s memories change over time.Many of my fellow members of the Horatio Alger Society of Distinguished Americans have recounted similar stories of being regarded as different and not always being part of the \u201cin\u201d crowd when they were growing up. The Horatio Alger Society inducts 10 to 12 new members each year. These are people who grew up under very difficult circumstances and went on to achieve at the highest levels of their respective endeavors. Many of their names would be quite familiar to the public. Are their stories aberrant, or are we truly the captains of our own destiny? In the game of chess, pawns are just used for the purposes of the royal pieces. In real life, \u201cpawns\u201d \u2014 average citizens \u2014 similarly are used by many in power for their own purposes, while at the same time vociferously proclaiming that they are the only ones looking out for the interests of the pawns, who happily follow their commands, thinking that this \u201croyal\u201d contingent has their interests in mind.In a chess game, a pawn can become any one of the royal pieces, if it can make it to the other side of the board. The opponent will do almost anything to keep one from reaching its goal, because that would interfere with the power structure. If they can keep the pawns on \u201ctheir side\u201d of the board, where it is much safer, the status quo can be maintained. Although no analogy is perfect, it is pretty easy to see the point here. By keeping large groups of Americans complacent and afraid to challenge authority, the position, wealth and power of those in authority can be maintained. The last thing those in authority want is independent-thinking citizens who wake up to the reality that this country was actually designed for them and not for a ruling class that thinks it knows what\u2019s best for everyone else. They dread the possibility of people actually scrutinizing their words and deeds, and holding them accountable for same. By using strong-arm tactics and a sheepishly compliant news media, which originally was supposed to be the guardian of truth, they have been very successful at pawn control.I can\u2019t remember how many times during my medical career I was told, \u201cYou can\u2019t do that\u201d or \u201cNo one has done that before\u201d or \u201cDo you think all the incredibly bright people who have preceded you didn\u2019t think of that?\u201d Certainly if I had listened to those comments instead of critically analyzing the problems and using both the triumphs and mistakes of others from the past to produce innovative solutions, my career path would have been considerably different. We have these magnificent brains with outstanding reasoning ability in order to be creative and in order to be able to critically analyze what we hear and see. All of us as citizens must stop acting like pawns and start acting like masters of our own destiny.We should not listen to those who say there is too much corruption for honesty and common sense to succeed. We cannot believe that our enemies are too powerful to combat, and we should not accept that most of the media will never change back to being stalwarts of integrity and truth. We can play the role of nice little pawn or we can be smart, courageous and move out of our \u201cgo along to get along\u201d comfort zone to accomplish something that is truly great for our future. At first, it might be a lonely journey, but eventually others will see the light, and we will shed the pawn mentality and be promoted to the position of proud and independent citizen of America.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.When I was a kid growing up in Detroit and Boston, there were multiple Christmas celebrations in public school. Everyone participated in the celebrations, including the Jews and the many individuals of Middle Eastern descent.Christmas carols were sung, presents were exchanged and food was consumed in a partylike atmosphere. There were very few people stoking the fires of sensitivity or trying to make everyone feel different. There\u2019s nothing wrong with diversity, but there is also nothing wrong with unity and enjoying overarching fun and good will. When someone said \u201cMerry Christmas,\u201d it was regarded as a salutation of good will toward everyone, whether they believed in Christ as their savior or not.By the same token, if someone wished you a happy Hanukkah or a Muslim greeting, and you did not belong to that particular group, certainly no one saw a reason for offense or for ascribing hateful motives to the greeter. I believe most people say \u201cMerry Christmas\u201d because they want to invite others to partake of their joy.City councils and other governing bodies that are so quick to order the removal of traditional reminders of Christmas \u2014 owing to a few vocal citizens taking offense \u2014 are often the very same people who support laws like Obamacare, even though that law offends millions of Americans who remain opposed to it. I guarantee you that these politicians cannot see the rank hypocrisy in their actions.How can reasonable people claim to be so concerned about everyone\u2019s feelings and proceed to ignore the will of the people? The answer is selfishness. I have some experience with this natural human characteristic that tends to be highly destructive. As a youngster, I had a violent temper, which got me into a lot of trouble. One day after much prayer and contemplation, it dawned on me that I was easily angered and offended because I was self-centered. Someone was always in my space or doing something to me. Me and mine \u2014 I was always focused on myself. Selfishness is characterized by the attitude \u201cIt has to be my way for everyone \u2014 not just for me \u2014 or I will be offended.\u201d This behavior includes intolerance of anyone or anything that provokes one to take offense.By the grace of God, I discovered how to remove myself from the center of every equation and look at things from the point of view of others. This made an enormous difference in my life and virtually eliminated anger cultivated by an attitude of perceived injury. If people can learn to look at the big picture when they are greeted by someone wishing them a Merry Christmas or other salutation with respect to a cherished celebration, they will realize that no harm is meant; in fact, just the opposite is being communicated.I find it fascinating to observe how easily some people can be whipped into a frenzy over nothing by agitators who probably derive great pleasure in seeing how they can play with the emotions of vulnerable individuals, who would not even have thought about being offended if it had not been suggested to them.The atmosphere of political correctness that permeates our society has an Orwellian quality to it. It\u2019s as though Americans are all essentially automatons who are expected to think, speak and act the same way. George Orwell\u2019s \u201cNineteen Eighty-Four\u201d describes a society in which anyone who bucks the rules is eliminated and their family and surroundings are investigated for signs of thought contamination.Unfortunately, such a description is too close to reality for comfort. It seems to me that we have truly lost our focus on important issues and have begun to concentrate on the book cover rather than its content. We have far too many important problems facing not only our nation, but the whole world to be consumed by never-ending nitpicking over language. By making that mistake, we\u2019re totally missing the point.Whether Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, atheist, agnostic or other, let\u2019s enjoy this festive season. Go out of your way to bring good cheer into the life of someone else. Forgive someone against whom you hold a long-standing grudge. Try to look at things from the vantage point of someone with whom you usually disagree. Speak to people you usually ignore.Like Ebenezer Scrooge in Charles Dickens\u2019 \u201cA Christmas Carol,\u201d it is likely that you will discover that being nice is actually fun and less stressful for everyone. Let\u2019s let those people who get their enjoyment by agitating others find something else to do with their time, while we devote our energies to worthwhile endeavors. Remember, \u201c\u2018Tis the season to be jolly,\u201d and by the way, Merry Christmas.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.As a youngster, I remember being taught to offer your seat on the bus to any elderly person. It was not unusual to see people offering to help carry a heavy or awkward box when a perfect stranger was obviously struggling with one.In today\u2019s culture, it would not be unusual for the stranger to encounter harsh criticism instead of help, because he failed to appropriately plan the transport of the heavy box. What has produced the coarsening of attitudes in modern society? Are the crude and mean-spirited comments heard on television and read in the print media having an undesirable effect on the populace at large?The key to civility is thinking about others first. When we only think about what makes us feel or look good, it becomes easier to disregard the needs and feelings of others. Prior to the severe economic downturn in 2008, a number of selfish, greedy business types, with complicity from public officials, created schemes to entice relatively inexperienced people to purchase houses that significantly ignored the old, established rule of never taking out a mortgage that was more than 2 times one\u2019s annual salary.These and other types of paper-pushing manipulations by a small but influential segment of Wall Street types and politicians produced enormous fortunes for many who actually produced little or nothing of value. I do not in any way resent great wealth and, in fact, I greatly admire many of my fellow Americans who, through their creativity and dedicated hard work, have make contributions that were valuable to many while enriching themselves. That is what capitalism is about. However, when people practice deceit and use clever tactics to enrich themselves or pass legislation at the expense of others, admiration quickly morphs into disgust. Other than Bernie Madoff and a few notable others, not many of these greedy individuals suffered any consequences for their part in the near-destruction of our economy and the shattering of the dreams of millions of Americans.Is it possible that during their formative years, these unethical and uncaring individuals were also influenced by the mean-spirited and self-centered behavior of those in the media or on the political scene who were held in high esteem while practicing mean and deceitful behavior? I am not saying that lack of civility is the root cause of all evil in our society, but I am saying that it can have a profound effect on our feelings toward others and their feelings toward us. Civility and political correctness, contrary to the thinking of many, are not the same. Civility constrains behavior and words based on genuine caring about others, while political correctness is only a facade of caring while hoping to cultivate public approval.Much politically correct behavior bears no resemblance to logic and common sense. For instance, there was a recent, widely publicized case of a 6-year-old boy in Colorado who was suspended from school for kissing the hand of a classmate. He was initially charged with sexual abuse, but after the public outcry, the charges were downgraded. Many people in the scientific community know that the human brain continues to mature and develop until about age 18. Immature children such as the little boy generally don\u2019t even know what sexual abuse is.Teachers are forced into the role of political-correctness police by bureaucratic administrators who, in many cases, obviously have no sense of the psychological makeup of young children. The potential to do harm to little children by administrative acts of this level of stupidity is tremendous. If we continue down this road of absurdity, we will produce a generation of paranoid and dysfunctional individuals who will eventually be in charge of taking care of those of us who are imposing these rules of political correctness upon them today.Civility and honesty are highly desirable traits, which should be imparted to our children both through example and planned lessons. This teaching should begin in the home, but certainly teachers, school administrators and other responsible adults should take every opportunity to facilitate the learning process. On the other hand, we must not fall into the trap of being so concerned about innocent words and deeds that we destroy people while worshipping ill-conceived rules of speech and behavior.It is unreasonable to expect a civil and compassionate society to emerge from a culture that tolerates and often even encourages cruel and dishonest behavior from its leading commentators and leaders. I do not believe these people are capable of seeing fault within themselves. Blinded by their ideology, they are incapable of seeing things from the view of others.Those of us who can still recognize imperfections in everyone, including ourselves, must not give up on decency, values and godly principles of loving one\u2019s neighbor and developing one\u2019s God-given talents to the utmost. They must strive to become valuable to the people around them and have principles that govern their lives. This has nothing to do with political parties, but has everything to do with the future of our nation.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.When I was in high school, I joined the ROTC initially because I was attracted to the uniforms. I figured they would provide an opportunity to escape the constant berating by fellow students owing to my outdated clothing. I was fascinated with the guns and became an excellent marksman, winning several marksmanship awards.I also led a drill team, which was very advanced with the art of disassembling and reassembling military rifles in record time. I advanced through the ranks, eventually becoming the city\u2019s ROTC executive officer and was offered a scholarship to West Point.I gained great respect for the military and its role in procuring and maintaining our freedom. I also gained great appreciation for firearms, as well as an understanding of how they can be used for great good or great harm.Our country is embroiled in an argument about the significance of the Second Amendment of the Constitution, which was a component of the Bill of Rights, guaranteeing the right of the people to keep and bear arms. Why was this right important enough to become a part of the United States Constitution?Obviously, it was felt that people had the right to protect themselves and their property, as has been the case with civilizations throughout the history of mankind. The method of protection and the types of arms used to achieve it has varied with technological advances. Some people prefer to focus on the intent of the Second Amendment, rather than the weapons themselves. Others feel that the biggest problem is the increasing potency of the weapons that can legally be used by virtually anyone. Others find different reasons to either support or argue for different interpretations of the amendment.I vividly remember as a teenager obtaining my first job with a regular paycheck as a high school biology-laboratory assistant.It\u2019s hard to describe how excited I was to be receiving a salary and contributing to the upkeep of my family\u2019s household, but the biggest thrill was doing something important while at the same time acquiring many skills that would prove useful in the future.Through the kindness and interest of my high school science teachers, I gained great familiarity with many scientific techniques that enabled me to acquire a job in the science laboratory at a well-known university while I was still a high school student.I was competing with college students for this job, but I had an advantage of experience, which worked in my favor.I held a long list of different types of jobs as I was growing up. I think each of them provided valuable skills that I might not otherwise have acquired. When I worked as a mailroom clerk, I learned the importance of accuracy and speed, as well as organization.When I was a teenager, my mother broke her own rule of never buying someone else\u2019s trouble and purchased a used car. We were quite excited because it was beautiful and sleek, and it was a convertible.The salesman said the car was practically new and was the deal of the century. Before long, it was discovered that the engine was completely shot, and the car was essentially a beautiful piece of junk. The salesman did not know my mother, and in the end, gladly refunded her money and took the car back.This kind of story is, of course, the reason that used-car salesmen have such a bad reputation. Just behind used-cars salesmen are politicians, who have also been known to sell people a bill of goods with no substance. Obamacare is such a bill of goods, one that was promoted as one thing and turned out to be something quite different. In the real world, it is frequently possible to gain legal relief in the case of a fraudulent deal, but in the case of Obamacare, we are being told that it is the law of the land and that you simply must live with it.When you place misdeeds by the government beyond the reach of normal mechanisms of recourse, you establish a condition ripe for abuse. If a bill is passed under false pretenses, shouldn\u2019t we question its legitimacy and. at the very least, reintroduce the bill after disclosing the aspects that were hidden previously? If the bill still passes after such disclosure, it would then become legitimate. We must remember that we are talking about one-sixth of the U.S. economy. We should not be playing fast and loose with the laws and details surrounding the most important possession we have: our health. I think this would be a fair-minded solution to anyone who does not have ulterior motives in health care reform.It is important that we learn to be compassionate even toward those with whom we disagree. How compassionate is it in a free society that is supposed to be for, of and by the people to say, \u201cToo bad sucker. This is now the law of the land\u201d \u2014 no matter how it was passed? The reason that solutions such as amendments and repeals were established was to remedy unforeseen problems associated with various legislative endeavors. The last thing we need are political victories that impose complex legislative rules on others. Rather, we should be looking for solutions that work for all the people, are fair and not based on deceit and ideology. The patriots who founded America were trying to escape from rulers who were certain that only they knew what was good for everyone else.When I was a teenager, we loved to play baseball, and in my neighborhood there were two teams. Both of them were quite good, but they were bitter rivals. It was not uncommon for fights to break out when they played each other.On one very memorable day, a very boastful team from another neighborhood challenged our neighborhood to a game. Their team was quite formidable by reputation, and neither of our teams would likely have been able to beat them. We decided to put aside our differences and use our strongest players to form one neighborhood team to take up the challenge. It was one of the most memorable games in my life, and we absolutely slaughtered the competition. That was the beginning of many lasting friendships and the end of an unproductive rivalry.The reason for the great success of our new neighborhood team was a recognition that we were much stronger when we combined our forces and stopped fighting each other. Is there a lesson to be learned here by those individuals who represent all Americans in both houses of Congress, the executive branch and the Supreme Court?The 14th verse in the 11th chapter of the book of Proverbs states that there is safety in the multitude of counselors. This means that you are much more likely to be successful if you\u2019re willing to listen to an array of opinions regarding an important decision. The health and well-being of all American citizens is an extraordinarily important issue, and now that the health plan that was put forth by only one party has been shown to be fatally flawed, it may be a very good time to put aside our differences and combine our strengths to accomplish a very worthwhile goal.There is no question that we need health care reform, but there is a major question about whether it should be something that is imposed upon the people by a government that thinks it knows what is best for everyone, or whether it would be better to create a system that preserves the freedom of choice and liberty of all Americans?What do the following five things have in common? The highest corporate-tax rate in the world; high personal and small-business taxes; the Affordable Care Act; an oppressive regulatory atmosphere with intimidation rather than help from the government; and overly aggressive environmental-protection policies.These five things \u2014 along with the devaluing of the U.S. dollar by the constant printing of money backed up by nothing but reputation \u2014 are largely responsible for an extremely sluggish economy that has little hope of improvement without a drastic change in economic philosophy.I was recently talking to a couple of very well-known entrepreneurs who had been extremely successful in creating vibrant businesses in the past.Both said they would not even consider starting a new business in the current economic environment. I also asked some people who had started companies that are household names whether they think they could have succeeded in today\u2019s environment. Their answer was a resounding no.This economic environment is toxic for growth. Americans must face the reality that our massive federal debt will eventually drown our children if we don\u2019t have the courage to act now and stop kicking the can down the road.It may feel good to some to print money at will and borrow as long as someone will lend us money, but what does this say about our compassion for those who will follow us?Having grown up in Detroit, I am particularly sad to see what has happened to a once-vibrant city that was the wealthiest in the nation. Many blame unions for strangling the goose that laid the golden egg, but unions serve their members and seldom have a big-picture perspective that takes into account the well-being of the larger society.I believe a great deal of the fault resides with the upper management of the Big Three automobile companies, who tolerated the excesses of the unions. They must have been fully aware that in due time, the consequences of such actions would be devastating not only to the automobile companies, but to the city, the state and the nation.Of course, by that time, they would have long ago escaped with their golden parachutes. Detroit is but a harbinger of the fate that will befall our beloved nation if we don\u2019t heed the warnings so vividly placed before us.Moreover, this toxic business environment is the perfect cultural medium for the growth of victimhood and the entitlement mentality. Political correctness dictates that one should never say such a thing for fear of being labeled heartless.I not only reject outright such foolishness, but rather I feel very strongly that these measures that suppress economic development also suppress the hopes and dreams of many Americans.I fear that the secular progressives have been winning lately by succeeding in convincing large portions of the population that they should be more concerned about the benefits they can collect than about the opportunities they lose when their God-given talents for achievement are replaced with dependence on government.We need to understand the connection between dynamic economic growth and the general welfare of the people. For anyone who does not understand: Robust economic growth creates plenty of jobs and opportunities for everyone and decreases the need for government dependency.Some on the side of big government will say, \u201cThere you go again talking about trickle-down economic theory,\u201d as they attempt to denigrate the empirical data supporting the validity of supply-side economics. I don\u2019t think it\u2019s necessary to attach fancy nomenclature to a theory of common sense.I am extremely encouraged by the resurgence of rationality I am seeing all around our country. I see people who understand that by adopting a reasonable corporate-tax rate, we can reverse the flow of economic activity out of our country.Story Continues \u2192As a child in elementary school, I was the epitome of an underachiever. You could always count on me to get the lowest score on a test, because I lacked even the basic knowledge of an unsophisticated street kid.I secretly admired the smart children in school and wondered how they always seemed to know the answers to any question the teachers would ask. I would have been doomed to failure but my mother, who was a domestic, keenly observed that her employers did a great deal of reading. She determined that my brother and I would become avid readers in the hope that we would emulate them. We resisted the change from our entertainment-focused lives, but because of her tenacity, my mother always prevailed in the end.One day, I noticed that I, too, knew most of the answers to the questions the teacher was asking, because I had recently been reading about the subject matter at hand. I was inspired to read everything I could get my hands on, and my academic ascension quickly landed me at the head of the class.Reading made me knowledgeable and completely changed my perception of myself and the world around me. I began to question things and to study subjects on my own, and I took great joy in astounding adults with my knowledge. The point here is, my perceptions of the world and my role in it were drastically altered by the accumulation of knowledge.The Founders of America said that our system of government was based on a well-informed and educated populace. Such people could not be easily led by less-than-honest politicians or by a press with an agenda that was politically biased. There was a time in America when basic knowledge and education were highly valued. Some people say it is not as necessary to be extremely knowledgeable today because we all have smartphones on our hips and can gain access to virtually any knowledge within seconds.This may be true, but it does not take into account the fact that we as human beings process new information based on the information we already have in our memory banks. For instance, if I knew there was a rabid dog on the loose, I would likely regard any stray dog I saw with fear and trepidation, whereas if I didn\u2019t know about the rabid dog, I would probably ignore the stray dog until it was too late. The more knowledge we have, the more difficult it is for others to lead us astray, and with knowledge, sound bites become much less effective.In order to be a well-informed, people must be more concerned about their personal finances and the national debt than they are about whether their favorite football team prevailed or who is featured on \u201cDancing with the Stars.\u201d I have nothing against sports and entertainment, but first things first. Prior to the destruction of many pinnacle nations that preceded us, there was excessive preoccupation with mundane things as well as the loss of values and national identity.Equally as detrimental was the toleration of corruption in the government. Today, we have all types of politically correct ways to say that someone told an outright lie. Unless we are able to face the truth and deal with it intelligently and courageously, we will continue the downward spiral that has characterized so many pre-eminent nations throughout history.It is time for all Americans to awaken and realize the importance of self-education and the acquisition of analytical abilities. It is not enough to simply say, \u201cI will vote for anyone who speaks well and promises to give me stuff.\u201d Most illegal-drug dealers and pimps have a good \u201crap,\u201d but once they have ensnared their victim, their true character is manifested. Once the victim may have been deceived, the master can say, \u201cYou agreed to this, and it\u2019s now the law.\u201dIt doesn\u2019t take a genius to realize that I am alluding to the wonderful promise made by President Obama during his first campaign when he said, \u201cIf you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor, period.\u201d His promise made taking a big risk on the adoption of a massive new federal program much more palatable. Now that it is apparent that this was the old bait-and-switch scheme, the question is this: Will we be smart enough to abandon undeserved loyalty to the purveyors of massive government intrusion and mastery of our lives, or will we continue to believe anything we are told by our masters \u2014 as long as their promises make us feel good?Could it be that God in His mercy and love for us is sending us progressively stronger messages that we are rapidly traveling down the wrong track? As a black American, I understand the immense pride many Americans of all backgrounds feel because we elected a black president, but it is time to be humble enough to admit that our electoral decisions must involve much more critical analysis. Our thinking should have nothing to do with party affiliation or race, but rather should concentrate on knowledge, truth and the American way.I would be delighted if we deleted party affiliation from all ballots, encouraging people to vote for ideas and records of accomplishment, not parties. We must once again begin to value truth, decency, hard work and the can-do attitude that produced the greatest nation in the history of the world.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.We have all heard the news stories about people so morbidly obese that they could not exit their house or apartment. I remember one story of a person who had to be lifted out with a crane after a wall was removed.These people are addicted to eating, and in some cases, ate incessantly even though they knew that they were jeopardizing their health and eventually, their lives. They grew so large that they were barely able to move and rendered themselves largely useless except as a food-disposal unit.This reminds me of our federal government, which was once agile and responsive, but now is so large and cumbersome that it has difficulty with the simplest of tasks. In order to sustain this ever-growing monster, it must be fed with ever-larger piles of our tax dollars.In 2010, statistics available from the Internal Revenue Service demonstrate that individuals earning $69,000 or more, which encompasses much of the middle class and everyone in upper classes, had a combined gross adjusted income of $5.1 trillion. That is an enormous sum of money, and it gives us some idea of the power of the economic engine that this nation possesses. The problem is that the federal budget was $3.5 trillion, which is almost two-thirds of that amount.We now have a federal debt of $17 trillion, which continues to grow. The current administration proudly points out that it is growing slower now than before. Such a claim makes it clear that they do not appreciate the seriousness of our spending problem. If a balloon is so full of air that is about to burst, it would be far better to begin deflating the balloon than to put just a little more air into it.When I was an intern at Johns Hopkins Hospital in the 1970s, I was very impressed by the caliber of patients on the wards. There would be presidents and CEOs of large corporations, as well as queens and crown princes of various countries, many of whom were dying of horrible diseases and all of whom would be quite willing to give all their wealth and titles for a clean bill of health.It was easy to understand that there is not much in life that is worthwhile without your health. It is by far our most important possession, which we should jealously protect. For this reason, I heartily agree that we as a nation need to focus significant emphasis and resources on providing good health care for all of our citizens. My question is this: Can we provide this without turning over control of our most important possession to the government?Some will say we have already relinquished it, so why talk about it any further? Others say only the poor are affected by Obamacare, and everything remains the same for all the others. Of course, this is not true, since the many regulations associated with the health care law affect everyone. Also, the economic impact does not occur in isolation.Rather than complain about Obamacare, it might be useful to begin to discuss some enhancements or future alterations that can make it work effectively or provide an alternative if it fails. The first question is, what do you need for good health care in America?You need a patient, a health care provider and a mechanism of payment. Along came a middleman \u2014 namely, the government and the insurance companies \u2014 to facilitate the relationship. Now the middleman has become the primary entity, with the health care provider and the patient at its beck and call. The whole enterprise has been turned upside down.In order to right the ship, we need to return the responsibility for good health care to the patient and the health care provider. One of the best ways to do this is through health savings accounts, which patients can control. Even if the federal government provided such an account for every American citizen that was increased by $2,000 each year, it would cost less than $700 billion a year and everyone would be covered.Keep in mind the fact that more than 150 million Americans are employed and their $2,000 per year in most cases would be happily supplied by the employer if that was their only health care obligation. This would make employers much more likely to want to expand their businesses and hire more people, and it would decrease the government\u2019s entitlement obligations by hundreds of billions of dollars per year.At least a quarter of the $2,000 per year would be devoted to bridge insurance or catastrophic insurance, and all citizens would have the right to contribute to their health savings accounts from other sources without limit. It would also be possible for people to transfer funds between accounts within a family.For example, if a husband needed care and was a thousand dollars short, his wife, son, daughter and father could make contributions from their accounts to cover the expense. This would essentially turn each family into its own private insurance company with no middleman.It should also be possible for everyone to donate up to 5 percent of the value of their health savings accounts to anyone of their choosing in any given year. For example, if there was someone in their church or an associate at work in need and for some reason didn\u2019t have adequate resources in his account, his fellow members and associates could band together and donate a portion of their accounts to cover the expense.This would create a strong sense of community, which is a very good thing. Since one could pass his savings on to a family member or anyone of his choosing at the time of death, there would be no incentive to spend everything in the account before dying.Over the course of a lifetime, it is likely that most people would have accumulated quite a significant amount in their health savings accounts, and it should be possible after reaching a certain dollar amount for people to withdraw a percentage of their savings for their personal use in any way they deem fit. For some elderly people, this could serve as a very nice retirement supplement.As time passed, individuals and families would accumulate extremely large amounts of money, and the government obligation would become smaller. Instead of the government becoming a bigger part of each person\u2019s life, it would diminish, reducing the need for ever-increasing revenue streams.This is just the basic framework of an alternative system to Obamacare that involves thinking outside of the box. With additions from positive and creative individuals, it could provide universal coverage that is simple to understand and truly affordable.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.A few weeks ago, I arrived from Europe at one of the Washington area\u2019s international airports. The wait in the customs line approached an hour, because there was only one customs agent working as more than 20 of the booths stood empty.I was told by a Transportation Security Administration (TSA) agent that this was a result of sequestration and it was designed to inflict maximum inconvenience on travelers so they would realize no part of the federal budget can be cut without horrible consequences. In similar fashion, the current government shutdown over disagreements about Obamacare has caused many \u201cnonessential\u201d governmental workers to be furloughed.It would not be unreasonable to ask this question: In order to cope with a federal debt close to $17 trillion, why is the government furloughing TSA and customs agents, preventing children from taking White House tours and generally doing everything it can to inflict pain and discomfort on the American people when it could have simply trimmed nonessential personnel and services from the budget with little or no inconvenience? The latter solution would make much more sense, even if we trimmed personnel by attrition, which would certainly be my preference. Over the course of time, it would make a tremendous difference not only for today, but for our progeny as well.Those who feel that the opposition to Obamacare is similar to the kind of disagreements that have resulted in threats of government shutdown in the past need to realize that this new governmental initiative affects one-sixth of our entire economy. It also represents one of the most dramatic alterations of federal policy impacting all of our lives in history. Those attempting the well-rehearsed radical tactic of demonizing anyone who opposes them should instead consider the tried-and-true practice of civil discussion and compromise; that is, unless they don\u2019t think they are capable of defending their positions in an open and honest conversation.The Obamacare battle is not politics as usual with the expected partisan bickering to which we have grown accustomed. When it comes to ascribing blame for the current shutdown, we the people must be wise and should resist being led like sheep by members of the political class and the media. We should ask ourselves, why do we have three branches of government? The answer, of course, is that it was established to prevent excesses by any single branch that might not be in the interest of the people.A very legitimate argument could be made that Obamacare is such an excess. Among other deleterious effects, it has led to many job losses and reduction in work hours and wages, termination of health insurance that had been provided by employers, economic stagnation, division among the populace and retrenchment of entrepreneurial endeavors and business expansion throughout the nation. These things are not in the interest of the people, yet the White House and Senate Democratic leaders have no qualms about forcing the health care law on the majority of Americans who disagree with it.Fortunately, the Founders of this nation foresaw such an occurrence and created a system that could impede rapid societal changes without appropriate study and agreement by the voters. The House of Representatives is fulfilling its obligation to stand strong against the imposition of laws and measures that hurt the American people.Like Karl Marx, many people in political leadership positions today have adopted the attitude that it is necessary to force their ideas on the people who they think are simply not smart enough to understand what is \u201cgood\u201d for them. This migration away from personal freedom and toward government dominance started long before the current administration took power. The effects are now blatantly obvious even to those who have been asleep at the wheel for decades.Traditionally, if someone is under investigation for wrongdoing, they are not placed in charge of a large program with duties that include the very kinds of things for which they are being investigated. The Internal Revenue Service is currently being investigated by the House Ways and Means Committee for illegal political activities.Nevertheless, the IRS has been placed in charge of enforcement of the provisions of Obamacare. Common sense should dictate that the tax agency should be barred from this position until the investigation is complete and its employees have been exonerated of wrongdoing. If they are not cleared, changes to the organization should be made before it is qualified for an oversight role. This point should be the focus of requests for a delay in the implementation of Obamacare.Placing the government in charge of our most important asset \u2014 our health \u2014 and using the IRS as the enforcement arm fundamentally changes the relationship between the people and the government. The federal bureaucracy was never meant to reside at the pinnacle of power in this nation. The complicity of many in the media in endorsing Obamacare and ignoring IRS wrongdoing must not be allowed to the lull the American people to sleep. If we don\u2019t wake up, we will definitely experience a fundamental change of our nation.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.When I was in high school in Detroit in the mid- to late 1960s, we used to engage in the common practice of \u201ccapping,\u201d which involved attempts to publicly humiliate your opponent with mean-spirited verbiage.I usually tried to avoid what I thought was a silly practice, but I remember one day being unable to resist the temptation to fire back when one of my classmates began talking about my shirt. He said, \u201cThat shirt looks like it\u2019s been through World War I, World War II, World War III and World War IV.\u201d I fired back a short but highly effective quip that made him a laughingstock. I simply said, \u201cAnd your momma wore it.\u201dInterestingly enough, after my verbal victory, that adolescent group, including the victim, became much more accepting of me, and it felt good to have gained their approval, even though I was sure that my value system was at odds with theirs. I began to socialize with these fellows, and there was a noticeable change for the worse in the way that I treated others. In retrospect, I am particularly ashamed of joining in episodes of heaping hideous verbal abuse on other targeted classmates, who were not guilty of anything other than not fitting in.Unfortunately, this type of infantile adolescent behavior is still quite prevalent in our current political environment. Instead of \u201ccapping\u201d their opponents, many in the political class engage in hyperbolic demagoguery in an attempt to demonize those who disagree with them. This is not surprising, because in his book \u201cRules For Radicals,\u201d Saul Alinsky, the original radical community organizer and societal change agent, says you should never have a rational discussion with your opponent. Doing so would humanize him, and your goal is to demonize him. With this tactic, he states that you can incur your opponent\u2019s wrath, causing him to respond angrily, and in many cases, irrationally, which then provides an opportunity to use that irrational response against him.This is an especially useful tactic when you have the media on your side. The adolescent \u201ccapping\u201d episodes seldom occurred between just two individuals, but were purposely put on glorious display in the company of an appreciative audience. Similarly, divisive politicians seem energized by microphones and cameras, and eagerly accuse their opponents of ridiculous things, such as wanting elderly people to die, children to starve or our nation to fail. In their heart of hearts, they know that their opponents want no such things, but their desire to score political points with an audience that wishes to believe negative things about others overwhelms the rule of integrity.Last week, I was engaged in a dinner conversation with a number of prominent individuals, including a very high official of the current administration. I was talking about the fact that we are severely compromising the future of our progeny by relentlessly increasing our national debt. He proudly proclaimed that the rate of debt accumulation was slowing down and, therefore, there was no cause for alarm. I stated that if a balloon was overinflated and in danger of rupturing, putting just a little more air into it, as opposed to a lot more air, would have the same disastrous results.He did not have a comeback for that argument, but I suspect that if you had given him a microphone and an adoring audience, he would have accused me of being critical and wanting the policies of the current administration to fail. I suspect the verbiage, however, would have been more colorful in an attempt to evoke an emotional response from the audience. There is a big difference between pointing out defects in the policies of an opponent in a thoughtful and rational manner, and engaging in wanton prevarication to stoke the fires of emotion.There is nothing wrong with disagreement. In fact, I am very fond of saying that if two people agree about everything, one of them is not necessary. Disagreement should not make people into enemies, especially if they are willing to discuss their differences rationally, rather than trying to demonize each other. All sides are guilty of this behavior, and we could all benefit from a dose of maturity and kindness. Instead of engaging in partisan bickering, try the following exercise for a week:\u2022 Speak to people you normally walk by and ignore.\u2022 Let someone else go first.\u2022 Help someone who is struggling.\u2022 Comfort someone who is distressed.\u2022 Give someone a couple of bucks who came up short at the checkout counter.\u2022 If you can afford it, give a hardworking individual in the service sector a generous tip.\u2022 Ignore those who only criticize and attack, and instead, concentrate on solving problems.Story Continues \u2192Today, the freedom of Americans to control their own health care needs is being threatened by massive governmental interference. Those attempting to fundamentally change America are attempting to take control of the most important thing any of us possesses: our health.It often comes at a heavy cost, but freedom is worth fighting for. In 1836, the brave defenders of the Alamo went down to defeat by Mexican Gen. Santa Anna and his army, which was 10 times greater in number than the defenders under the command of Lt. Col. William Barret Travis. Not all of the 200 defenders were Texans. Many of the civilian defenders, including some Mexicans, were more loyal to Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie, who fell ill prior to the battle.The defenders who had captured San Antonio just months earlier had retreated to the well-fortified Alamo and had sent for reinforcements, fully expecting to be able to hold on until help arrived. There was tension between the troops of Travis and the followers of Bowie, but once they realized that they faced a greater enemy, they presented a united front of legendary fortitude.However, Col. James Fannin, who was just 90 miles away in Goliad, concluded that the cause was hopeless and refused the request for help. The brave men who died fighting for freedom at the Alamo thought that help was on the way, just like the brave men who died defending the U.S. compound in Benghazi. The Alamo was lost on March 6, 1836, but its defenders killed 600 of Santa Anna\u2019s men before they died. The stand taken by those patriots inspired many others to join the war. Victory was eventually won, in no small part a result of the spirit and courage of those who refused to surrender in the face of overwhelming odds.Leaders of the Obama administration and the United States Senate have tried to convince the defenders of individual freedom in America that their fight is futile and that it is impossible for them to win. Those opposing the government takeover of the health care system have varying opinions about whether it is better to fight now or to wait for a more opportune time.Members of Congress who largely oppose Obamacare but are unwilling to join their compatriots in the battle to defund this ill-conceived and economically detrimental law must remember the lesson from the Alamo: Defeat can unleash the power of righteous indignation. Even if the battle is lost, the courageous act of presenting a united front in defense of the U.S. Constitution and individual rights will inspire tens of millions of Americans who feel disenfranchised to join the cause. Today\u2019s struggle will lead to ultimate victory starting in 2014 and ending in 2016 with the restoration of a nation that is for, of and by the people and not for, of and by the government.Those representatives and senators who insist on pushing through Obamacare against the will of the people should be clearly identified so they can be appropriately dealt with by their constituents. The authority of officeholders, after all, is dependent upon the ballot box. By replacing those who do not represent the interest of the people with individuals who cherish our Constitution and our traditional values, we can initiate logical measures that can provide truly affordable health care for every American. Those measures would include a return of decision-making to patients and their health care providers, tort reform and the placement of electronic medical records under the control of the patient and not the Internal Revenue Service.Genuine representative government would also allow us to enact logical tax reform, policies that foster energy independence, a rejuvenated space program and other programs that have led to amazing innovations that have improved our lives. Responsive governance would rid Americans of unwarranted regulations that stifle economic growth, provide parents with choice in education, establish an understandable foreign policy that recognizes the role of true leadership in a troubled world, return fiscal responsibility to its rightful position, and establish social policies that help people move up the economic ladder, rather than just survive.We have an opportunity to re-establish a government in which freedom of speech is cherished. As Thomas Jefferson once famously said, \u201cWhen the people fear their government, there is tyranny; when the government fears the people, there is liberty.\u201d We must remember that our representatives work for us; we don\u2019t work for them. Whenever they forget that, we must act to re-establish proper order.Those who wish to fundamentally change America are happy with the trends we see. However, those of us who love the Judeo-Christian values upon which our country was founded and under which it flourished in the past, must not dwell on past mistakes, but learn from them. We must not capitulate to secular progressives, and unlike them, we should be loving and kind. But most importantly, we must never give up.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.I have been interested in the political atmosphere of our country since my preteen years. It has been particularly interesting to observe the political shenanigans adopted by many of those wishing to obtain or maintain power. Fortunately, there have also been many who were truly interested in serving the people who put them in office. Looking at one\u2019s life, voting record and words can provide significant insight into which of the aforementioned categories a political figure fits.In the 1960s, John F. Kennedy wrote a book titled \u201cProfiles In Courage,\u201d which was very inspiring, as he examined the lives of individuals who had enough daring to go against the flow and make a real difference in society. As a young, very intelligent president of our country, he was faced with many daunting problems, not the least of which was an attempt by the Russians to supply Cuba with nuclear weapons, which would have been situated just 90 miles off of our shores.Although there have been many attempts to rewrite the history of the Cuban missile crisis, the bottom line is that Kennedy had the necessary backbone to stand up to Nikita Khrushchev and avert an enormous detrimental shift in the power structure of the world while enhancing America\u2019s international image.Some readers are probably already irritated that I have said something positive about someone who is not a member of their political party. It is my belief that if JFK were alive today, advocating personal responsibility and patriotism, he might find his views at odds with many in the Democratic Party.Perhaps it is time to de-emphasize political affiliations and labels, and instead concentrate on the philosophies that define one\u2019s beliefs and actions. The direction of our country is not good, and \u201cwe the people\u201d \u2014 not we the Democrats or we the Republicans \u2014 are in desperate need of courageous leadership, guided by an understanding of our Constitution.Our divided government was formed by diligent men who had studied the history of governmental structures throughout the world and wanted to design a system that would not succumb to the temptation to continuously expand its size and scope at the expense of the people.An important concept was the separation of powers with checks and balances among the three branches of government. It was a rather ingenious idea to invest each of the three branches of government with enough power to check unwarranted power grabs by the others.There is, however, a breakdown in this system when officeholders are more concerned about their legacy or their re-election than they are about the proper functioning of government. Our Founders were most concerned about the possibility of the executive branch seizing power and disregarding constitutional constraints.I suspect they would have been horrified to witness the manipulative and secretive strong-armed techniques utilized by the current administration to push through Obamacare. I\u2019m sure they would also be shocked to see an administration that picks and chooses the laws it wishes to enforce, thereby diminishing the power of the legislative branch of government.This practice in some ways resembles that of the centralized government system that swept the Soviet Union, whose notorious founders wrote that it was sometimes necessary to force ideas on a populace that will eventually come to accept and endorse the ideas. Similarly, our current leadership is certain that Americans will eventually see the wisdom of governmental oversight in almost every aspect of their lives.If we are to pass a free and prosperous nation on to our progeny, it is imperative that the legislative branch of government exhibit the courage to exercise the check function it possesses. Lawmakers cannot be afraid that they will be blamed for a government shutdown if they defund Obamacare.They have the ability to separate the health care law from the rest of the federal budget and fund one without funding the other. In doing so, they need to make it abundantly clear that they are willing to fund the government and its essential functions, but they feel that Obamacare is detrimental to the future economic health of America.If the Democrat-controlled Senate reattaches the law, or if the executive branch makes the decision to fund Obamacare at the expense of other vital national functions, the electorate must take notice and act decisively in 2014. Many say that those who want to restore constitutional restraints are fighting a useless battle, but we must remember that freedom is reserved only for those willing to fight for it.I am confident that the people will awaken from their apathy and vigorously support whoever has the backbone to stand up for them.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.Critical decisions require preoperative clarity.As the saga in Syria demonstrates, life is full of dilemmas for all of us. As I was approaching the end of my residency training for neurosurgery, I was faced with the significant dilemma of deciding whether to pursue private practice opportunities, which were offering a great deal of money, or remain in an academic practice with little in the way of financial rewards, but with great opportunities to contribute to the field. After much soul-searching and prayer, I decided on an academic career.In retrospect, I think that was the correct choice. It gave me not only an opportunity to make neurosurgical contributions, but because of the storybook nature of my career, I was afforded a platform from which many lives outside of the medical arena would be positively affected.Now our nation is faced with the very difficult dilemma of whether or not to involve ourselves militarily in the Syrian conflict. The Middle East has been the site of almost continuous conflict for hundreds of years despite our efforts and the good intentions of many other nations around the world. The relationships between the various factions that are fighting are extremely complex and plunging oneself into the middle of them without a deep understanding of all the players is unlikely to yield peace. Fortunately, a breakthrough may be at hand if Syria places its chemical weapons under international control.The current Syrian conflict is about two years old and has produced about 100,000 deaths \u2014 1,400 of which have been attributed to chemical warfare. This has evoked an angry response from much of the world, but at the same time, most world leaders are reluctant to advocate or endorse an external military solution. Perhaps they are asking the question: \u201cWhy is it worse to kill 1,400 people with chemicals than it is to kill 100,000 people with conventional weapons?\u201d Certainly, some thought should be devoted to the answer that question. We should also be asking who are the good guys and who are the bad guys in the Syrian conflict, and how do we make that determination? It certainly seems that the constituency of the rebels is undergoing metamorphosis and now includes avowed enemies of the United States and Israel. What will these people do if they, rather than an international force, are able to gain control of a chemical-weapons stockpile, and what role will they play in a new government? Are we certain that the chemical attack was ordered by the current government and not by members of the rebel group who would benefit greatly by staging such an attack in a way that would implicate the government of Syrian President Bashar Assad? If we didn\u2019t help the Iranian people four years ago when they were rising up against a totalitarian government, why are we now involving ourselves in a conflict that is not nearly as clear cut as that one was? Is it only because we suspect that the government used chemical weapons against its own people? If the answer to that last question is yes, then the only thing that rebels have to do in the future to secure our help is to feign a government-sponsored chemical attack on the people. This is not to say that the rebels were responsible for the current attack, but it is to emphasize the fact that we need to establish clear, well-thought-out policies that are understandable by the average citizen.When I faced difficult surgical decisions, I used to perform something called a best-worst analysis. This is explained in some detail in my book \u201cTake the Risk,\u201d but basically involves asking four questions:1. What\u2019s the best thing that happens if I do it?2. What\u2019s the worst thing that happens if I do it3. What\u2019s the best thing that happens if I don\u2019t do it?4. What\u2019s the worst thing that happens if I don\u2019t do it?If one thoughtfully answers these questions, it is pretty easy to see that the worst things could be catastrophic not only in the Middle East, but could trigger World War III. In light of that possibility, the argument that America must act to avoid the appearance of a paper tiger seems trite. I certainly am not advocating ignoring what has happened in Syria, but I think it would be wise to support the move to place Syria\u2019s chemical-weapons stockpile under international control and explore other non-military options, such as a financial boycott. These are things that could and should fall under the purview of the United Nations, which at some point needs to justify its existence.When this crisis is over and before the next one starts, we need to clarify our goals not only in the Middle East, but around the world. These should not be partisan issues; we cannot afford to change our goals with each administration. We must also not waste this opportunity to learn important lessons. We do not need to draw red lines in the sand that telegraph our intentions. Rather, we need leaders whose foreign policy is guided by America\u2019s best interests, rather than their own political motives.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.Spacey ideologues are alien to the American wayHave you ever noticed how reluctant many politicians are to speak out on an issue until they have had an opportunity to find out what the party line is? They don\u2019t want to be on the \u201cwrong\u201d side of the issue, because that might cost them some political capital. Doesn\u2019t it seem strange that so many politicians are almost 100 percent in line with what the party leaders have to say and appear to be frightened of repercussions from the leadership if they stray from the party fold? I wish I could say that this is a phenomenon that is only seen in one party but, unfortunately, the problem seems to be ubiquitous in America today.I am always amused when I hear various people in the media trying to characterize my political views. Many say that I am a conservative. Others think that I am a closet liberal, and some say they must wait before deciding on an appropriate label for me.I prefer to think of myself as someone who belongs to the \u201clogical\u201d party. We have so many overwhelming problems in our nation today that labeling and categorizing people seems pretty trite. I\u2019m reminded of the movie \u201cIndependence Day,\u201d starring Will Smith, in which extraterrestrial aliens invade the Earth and suddenly, the Americans and the Russian are allies, as are the Israelis and Arabs and virtually every other group with a long history of fractious relationships. Our problems may not be quite as great as if we were facing an invasion from outer space, but if we don\u2019t address them intelligently rather than ideologically, the end result will be similar \u2014 namely, destruction of our society.Although there are many problems that threaten our well-being, the one that I think could dramatically change life for everyone in the United States and around the world is our growing national debt, which is now approaching $17 trillion. Counting one number per second, which is impossible, particularly when you get into the higher numbers, it would take 539,000 years to reach 17 trillion. This is a number so staggering that it is hard to comprehend, and it continues to grow by several billion every week.There was a time when we were concerned as a nation about passing on debt to the next generation. In fact, Thomas Jefferson said that it is immoral to do so. Some will say: How can Thomas Jefferson be used as a moral barometer when he is said to have had a mistress who was a slave? I might say that as well if my goal was to deflect the conversation away from this looming disaster.When certain national leaders minimize the significance of our staggering debt, it calls into doubt their understanding of both history and economics. Our currency used to be backed completely by gold. However, a few decades ago we began to rely more on the faith and good name of the United States of America as our monetary security. If there is a significant downgrading of what that name stands for \u2014 which is eminently possible \u2014 and if our creditors demand repayment of our debts, the financial ramifications will be devastating and will be felt in every household in America almost immediately.Reasonable people will have found nothing controversial in what I\u2019ve written so far, while some others will be nitpicking. Logical thinkers, regardless of their party affiliation should be asking: What can we do to avert a crisis? We need to go beyond just recognizing that the problem exists. We need to fix it.Common sense dictates that if your debt is growing faster than your income, you need to cut spending. Just slowing the rate of expansion of debt is ridiculous when you are on the brink of destruction. Having said that, the problem cannot be solved with budgetary cuts alone. The better way to solve the problem is by growing the economy. This means creating an atmosphere of cooperation between government and business rather than the animosity that currently reigns. We have the highest corporate-tax rate in the world, which is not conducive to economic growth. This is not controversial, and both parties have agreed that it needs to be fixed, so they should just do it. We also need to reform the tax code, which currently is so complex that no one can possibly comply completely with it. Most importantly, the government needs to get out of the lives of the people. Just read the Constitution and see what the government is supposed to be doing. Perhaps that will keep government officials busy enough to restrain their intrusion into every aspect of the lives of the citizenry.We can join the destructive political fighting that is tearing apart the nation for everyone, or we can more logically choose to fight the entrenched corruption in leadership that is ideologically driven, while seeking real solutions to real problems.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.It is hard to believe that 50 years have elapsed since the famous \u201cI have a dream speech\u201d of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. on the Mall in Washington. I was an 11-year-old child in Detroit languishing in the midst of poverty, but very interested in the strides that were being made in the civil rights movement.I was the only black kid in my seventh-grade class and over the previous two years had risen from the bottom of the class to the top. My mother had forced us to read, which had a profound positive effect on both my brother Curtis and myself. I was quite optimistic that things were getting better for black people in America.If King could be resurrected and see what was going on in America today, I suspect he would be extraordinarily pleased by many of the things he observed and disappointed by others. He, like almost everyone else, would be thrilled to know that there was a two-term black president of the United States of America and a black attorney general, as well as many other high government officials, business executives and university presidents.\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: King\u2019s dream: Looking back, marching forward for a new generation\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tPerhaps just as thrilling would be the sight of black doctors, lawyers, airline pilots, construction foremen, news anchors, school superintendents and almost any other position imaginable in America. The fact that seeing blacks in such positions no longer raises eyebrows is a testimony to the tremendous progress that has been made in America over the last 50 years.There are some areas, however, where I suspect he might be less than thrilled. The epidemic of black-on-black violent crime indicates that there has been a significant deterioration of values in the black community. Not only are the lives of their fellow blacks and others being devalued by street thugs, but the lives of unborn babies are being destroyed in disproportionate numbers in the black community.There was a time when blacks were justifiably angry that the larger community discounted their value, but now, ironically, many members of the black community themselves place little or no value on these precious lives that are snuffed out without thought. I think King would be waging a crusade against the marginalization of black lives in America.\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: Morning rally kicks off day\u2019s events honoring March on Washington\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tAnother area of great concern would be the fact that 73 percent of black babies are born out of wedlock. When this occurs, in most cases the educational pursuits of the mothers are terminated and the babies are condemned to a life of poverty and deprivation, which makes them more likely to end up in the penal system or the welfare system. This is a burden not only for the black community but for the nation at large.Although I believe King would be very concerned for all parties in these tragedies, his energies would be primarily channeled into an attempt to give these young women the kind of self-esteem that would preclude their yielding to the charms of individuals who really don\u2019t care about them and are only interested in their selfish pleasures.King was a huge advocate of education and would be horrified by the high dropout rates in many inner-city high schools. He, like many others, was vilified, beaten and jailed for trying to open the doors of education to everyone, regardless of their race.If he were alive today, he would have to witness people turning their backs on those open doors and choosing to pursue lives of crime or dependency. I do not believe he would simply complain about these things, however.Rather, he would be raising funds to create programs that would show these young people that they do have real choices that can greatly enhance the quality of their lives.Perhaps the biggest disappointment for King would be the wholesale adoption of a victim mentality that makes people feel that they are entitled to being cared for by others rather than working tirelessly to create wealth and opportunities for their progeny.The amount of wealth that resides within the black community today is staggering. If the black community, like Jewish, Korean and other cultures in America, learned how to turn over dollars within their own community at least a couple of times before sending them out into the larger society, they would create wealth.I believe King would advocate such economic policies and would encourage those who benefit from the wealth to reach back and pull others up by providing jobs and opportunities. I think he would stress the fact that this kind of philosophy will foster freedom and independence for the black community, regardless of whether anybody else helps or not.Finally, we should all remember the aspect of his dream in which he desired that people should be judged by their character and not by the color of their skin. In part, this means no one should assume that a black person would adhere to certain political orthodoxy any more so than a white person would.Story Continues \u2192The Founders of our nation toiled long and hard to establish a government that was representative of the people. They actually designed a reasonably effective system, but over the years, significant metamorphosis has occurred, producing something that is quite dissimilar from their original intent.There were not a lot of perks for early congressional representatives, and the pay was quite meager. People willing to take on such responsibilities were unlikely to be desirous of perpetual re-election. In many ways, this was a good thing \u2014 frequent replacement of representatives increased the likelihood that they would have their finger on the pulse of the communities they represented.Our Founders also saw no reason for a gigantic central government, because they felt that the states would be much more in tune with the needs of their constituents and be able to provide appropriate legislation to facilitate local and national goals. They felt that the purpose of the government was to protect the people from foreign and hostile domestic forces, to protect their property and to enable their pursuit of happiness. Obviously, there were some other purposes, like facilitating transportation and containing disease, but the point is, limited federal government was desirable, as was maximum freedom for the people.One of the prime advantages of a small central government was that it would only require a small amount of tax revenue to sustain itself. The Founders knew from studying past civilizations that the nation\u2019s resources would either belong to the people or to the government, and they preferred the former. Our Founders as well as many of our revered social commentators have had some interesting things to say about our government and the legislative process:George Washington: \u201cGovernment is not reason; it is not eloquence; it is force. Like fire, it is a dangerous servant and a fearful master.\u201dMark Twain: \u201cNo man\u2019s life, liberty or property are safe while the legislature is in session.\u201dThese are just a couple of the numerous quotes available to demonstrate that concern about government overreach is not a new phenomenon in America. However, that concern is now being fueled by blatant favoritism shown to members of Congress and their staffs regarding the requirement to participate in the insurance programs offered by Obamacare.It is abrasive to a sense of fair play that friends of the administration have been permitted to delay their enrollment in the program for a year or more. Now we are seeing protests from some of the same unions that were strong supporters of the act as they realize that many of their \u201cCadillac\u201d health plans are in jeopardy. Less than 3 percent of federal workers want to enroll in Obamacare \u2014 even though they strongly supported its passage. However, the most offensive thing of all to anyone with a sense of justice is a provision that will extend government subsidies to members of Congress and their staffs to defray their health care costs while the people they represent must suffer the slings and arrows of this outrageous program forced upon them through a host of backroom deals that would shame a mobster. Some of these representatives, unwilling to accept the deal for themselves, were actually complicit in forcing Obamacare on all Americans without even reading it. This is the height of irresponsibility, and it is hard to imagine how anyone claiming to represent the interest of their constituents could even look at themselves in the mirror if they are guilty of such actions.Rather than rushing headlong down the path of destruction, like a lemming following his leader, I would implore every member of Congress to ask himself or herself this question: Why are so many people fleeing from this legislation if it is such a great masterpiece? Would you eat food prepared by a great chef if he refused to eat it himself and all of his staff also refused to eat it? We need to understand that we are trying to create living situations that are good for all of our citizens. This is America, and we certainly should eschew anything that smacks of favoritism, especially toward the people honored by winning the people\u2019s trust. To their credit, some of our congressional representatives are preparing a bill that will preclude this type of preferential treatment. Still, it is truly disappointing that they would have to do this at all. Every single member of Congress should be up in arms at the very thought of differential treatment in a country that was supposed to be a model of egalitarianism.Passage of Obamacare and its subsequent endorsement by the Supreme Court blatantly disregard the will of the people. This is certainly something one would expect from a ruler \u2014 not from a servant. This whole situation can be a wake-up call for government officials to rekindle that spirit of sacrifice and service that fueled our unprecedented rise to the pinnacle of the world.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.When babies are born, they have little choice but to trust their caregivers, who are usually the parents. As they mature and are able to distinguish one person from another, they tend to show great preference for the parents with whom they have bonded. A trusting relationship develops that should remain intact throughout life, barring violation of that trust. Unfortunately, in some cases, the baby or young child suffers abandonment, abuse or some other form of emotional injury, and the trust is violated. Often the relational rupture cannot be repaired or requires extensive explanations and alteration of behavior to heal.Relationships between the masses of people in the governing bodies can also be healthy or fractured. For decades in America, a guaranteed laugh line was, \u201cI\u2019m from the government and I\u2019m here to help you.\u201d As things exist now in our country, the situation has deteriorated to the point where this is no longer funny.Years ago, National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden would have almost unanimously been declared a traitor for having revealed government secrets to foreign sources. Now because so many people see the United States government as dishonest and untrustworthy, Mr. Snowden is viewed as a whistleblower worthy of praise for having the courage to expose secretive behavior by the government that involved spying on all Americans. Only by understanding his motives will we be able to appropriately characterize his actions. The larger question is, do we have an honest government that is transparent and trustworthy, or is there a legitimate cause for concern on behalf of the citizens of our nation? It is certainly not too late for our government to come clean about the many scandals that have been characterized as \u201cphony\u201d by the executive branch. Government officials say there is just a misunderstanding of the facts. If this is the case, why not just answer some basic questions and clear things up for the sake of transparency and trust? It should not be all that difficult to answer some simple questions, such as these:Historically, we have never deserted our men and women in combat despite the danger or difficulty in attempting to save them. Our enemies have learned that we do not give up, and if they attack us, there will be a significant price to pay. Equally important, our troops have never had reason to doubt the commitment of our government to use all available resources to ensure their safety. Given this past commitment, why did the administration abandon our forces in Benghazi, Libya?There are surveillance cameras in stores, private and public businesses, airports and other areas of public transportation. In almost all cases, there are signs posted informing the public that they are being monitored. Why is our government using the National Security Agency to spy on the telephone and email records of the American people, and who knows what else, without first informing them? Will officials commit to at least informing us in the future of their decisions to disregard the Fourth Amendment, which prohibits illegal and inappropriate searches and seizures? Why isn\u2019t this kind of activity just another version of what happened in Watergate, but at a much higher technical level?Many people have sought refuge in this country to avoid persecution by the governing powers. America was supposed to be a place where you can confidently voice disagreement with the government without fear of retribution. Now it has been shown without doubt that the Internal Revenue Service has been intentionally harassing perceived opponents of the current administration. Why isn\u2019t this a constitutional violation, and why shouldn\u2019t \u201cwe the people\u201d be outraged that freedom of expression is being suppressed by the very people who are supposed to protect it? Since public trust in the IRS has been so badly compromised, why should this agency be placed in charge of compliance with Obamacare?Those who have visited a prison might have noticed that most of the inmates are innocent of the crimes of which they were convicted \u2014 at least in their own eyes. Certainly, that shouldn\u2019t come as a shock \u2014 rationalization is a very powerful mental tool for assuaging the conscience. In light of this, how can members of the administration accused of wrongdoing think they can investigate themselves in a manner that will prove objective and credible to the public?Why does the administration continue to characterize the deadly Fort Hood shootings as \u201cworkplace violence\u201d when virtually everyone else \u2014 including the suspect himself \u2014 says it was an act of terrorism? Don\u2019t those who maintain that view realize that the public will not hold them responsible for an act of terrorism that occurred on American soil during their watch?People want to have faith in their government. The current administration doesn\u2019t have to be the most transparent one in history, as was promised, but a little transparency would certainly be helpful at this time.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.These days, it seems like everything is made into a political football. Perhaps the one thing we can agree upon is the importance of education for everyone.Currently in the United States, approximately 30 percent of the people who enter high school do not graduate. This was considerably less of a problem during the agricultural age or the industrial age, when all one needed to be successful financially was a strong back and a willingness to work. Now that we have advanced to the technological-information age, education has assumed paramount importance for success in one\u2019s own life and for the future of the country. It would not be accurate for us to assume that everyone who graduates from high school in America is well educated. Gone are the days, for the most part, when vigorous academic standards judged the passage from one grade to the next and social promotions were rarely done.My mother, unfortunately, only had an opportunity to obtain a third-grade education prior to her marriage at age 13 and her move to Detroit with my father. A divorce ensued when she discovered that he was a bigamist, and she was faced with the task of raising two young sons on her own.She worked as a domestic, sometimes cleaning two or three houses per day, but she was very observant and noticed that the owners of the homes she cleaned were very well educated. She made a correlation between education and financial success and began to crave education for herself and for her two sons. She made us turn off the television and read books and submit to her written book reports \u2014 which she couldn\u2019t read, but we didn\u2019t know that. I was rather disgruntled about these assignments, but we had to do it, so there was no point arguing.Interestingly enough, after a while, I began to enjoy reading because I learned things that no one else knew. This was especially satisfying because previously, I had been known as the dumbest kid in the class. Within the space of a year and a half, I went from the bottom of the class to the top \u2014 much to the amazement of classmates and teachers alike.I reached a point where I couldn\u2019t wait to get my hands on another book and learn even more. Reading made me want to explore many of the opportunities that existed in Detroit for anyone willing to seek them out. Even today in its bankrupt state, Detroit has much to offer through its library system, fabulous museums, art galleries, universities and offerings of cultural events. There were academic contests and numerous clubs, but you had to seek them out.The point is, even in some of the most depressed areas of America, a good education can be obtained with concerted effort. My mother eventually taught herself to read, obtained her GED, went on to college and in 1994, received an honorary doctoral degree from Spalding University in Kentucky, so today she is Dr. Carson, too.The educational opportunities afforded me in Detroit led me to obtain an undergraduate degree in psychology from Yale, a Doctor of Medicine degree from the University of Michigan, specialty training in neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University and neurosurgical fellowship training in Australia, all of which culminated in my appointment as director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins at age 33. My brother became an engineer and works today for an aviation company. It is unlikely that I would become a brain surgeon and my brother a rocket scientist if our mother had not been committed to pursue education so intensely.Many inner-city youngsters today are being entangled through choices they are making with the juvenile justice system, the penal system or the medical-social services system through unintended pregnancies. In many of these instances, educational pursuits are abruptly terminated, leaving the victims to suffer the consequences of poor education in an increasingly sophisticated society.In the darker American period of slavery, it was illegal to educate a slave. Slave owners recognized that an educated individual is a free individual. The same is true today, and it benefits everyone in our society to maximize the education of every member of our nation. We produce 70,000 engineers per year in America, while China produces 400,000 per year. We are unlikely to be able to close that gap in an increasingly technological world unless we ensure the solid education of every American.The added gigantic benefit of a well-educated populace is spectacular innovation and savvy voters who do not have to be spoon-fed and who are difficult to manipulate. That is something that should be highly desired by all political parties and by every nation that wants to be self-sustaining, happy, healthy and independent.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.Recent calls to impose an economic (or in the case of celebrities, a personal) boycott on the state of Florida because of dissatisfaction with the verdict in the George Zimmerman trial need to be reconsidered. Certainly, boycotts can be powerful weapons, especially in a free-market economy. However, they need to be utilized appropriately and with great wisdom rather than in a reactionary way without thorough consideration of the ramifications.In the mid-1950s, Montgomery Ala., was a bastion of racism. One of the manifestations of systemwide discrimination against blacks was the rule that blacks had to sit in the back of the bus \u2014 even though they paid the same fare as everyone else. This long-standing tradition was tolerated but despised by generations of hard-working black citizens, who had grown accustomed to being treated unfairly. Fortunately, a young, very wise leader appeared on the scene and, at a series of church rallies, was able to explain to the black community the economic power they possessed if they collectively decided to withhold those bus fares and walk or carpool. They also boycotted many unfair merchants throughout the city. Initially, those being boycotted tried to pretend that this would have no impact whatsoever on them, but Dr. Martin Luther King and other wise leaders held the boycott together month after month until the racist establishment yielded to economic pressure and changed their de facto rules.After the verdict was handed down in the Zimmerman case, the rage was immediate, widespread and understandable. A black teenager who was walking home and apparently minding his own business ended up being killed, and no one was penalized by the legal system. On the surface, this certainly would seem to be a miscarriage of justice to most fair-minded individuals. However, a jury was impaneled and our legal system \u2014 rightly or wrongly \u2014 concluded that George Zimmerman was not culpable in the death of Trayvon Martin after the facts in the case were carefully examined.\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: George Zimmerman spotted packing heat in Texas\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tIn a case that was bound to be highly controversial and racially charged, it would have been wise to include jurors who shared the ethnic backgrounds of both parties involved. Frankly, it is hard to understand why the lawyers on either side did not seem to understand the implications of the composition of the jury in a racially controversial case. Nor was there appropriate understanding of the importance of optics in a case where the public interest was so high. There is no question that we have made substantial racial progress in American society and that we were moving toward a post-racial society until recent years. We must not abandon the idea of judging people by the content of their character rather than the color of their skin, and at the same time, we must be mature enough not to inject race into every issue that involves people of different racial backgrounds.Preserving peace and safety is the job of police officers, but organizations such as neighborhood watches can be very helpful to police when properly supervised. Will there be tragedies caused by inappropriate judgments by neighborhood watchmen? Of course this will occur as long as imperfect human beings are involved. Even the police themselves are sometimes wrong because they, too, are human beings. There are plenty of cases today throughout the country where the police are accused of discrimination or other inappropriate actions. A few of these cases are justified, but the vast majority of police are decent and fair, in my experience. I invite those who feel otherwise to imagine an America or any other nation devoid of police for just 24 hours.There are many things that can be learned from the case at hand, and we would be wise to concentrate on those things with the hope of avoiding these kinds of tragedies in the future. First of all, neighborhood watchmen should be certified by the local police, who can instruct them on what to do in situations such as this. For instance, they could have told Mr. Zimmerman to call out to a suspicious individual, identify himself as a neighborhood watchman and ask him where he was going or what he was doing. If the answer is unsatisfactory in such cases, the police should be called immediately. The police could teach the neighborhood watchmen that it is inappropriate to approach a suspect and also instruct them on the appropriate use of any weapons with which they might be armed.\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: Smithsonian director wants Trayvon Martin\u2019s hoodie\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tOpinions will vary on the outcome of this case based on ideology, upbringing and life experiences, but our legal system has spoken. The resultant controversy creates an opportunity to explore important issues of race and our judicial system, but calls for a boycott of Florida are unwarranted at this time. Such actions should be reserved for clear cases of systemic injustice.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.I  have had the opportunity to visit many countries, and I have taken it upon myself to inquire how people in other nations prevent voter fraud. Even those from Third World countries tell me that everyone has some type of official voting credential that is nationally recognized. It seems only logical that you would want to ensure that only legitimate constituents of a region would be able to vote on issues relevant to that region. Nevertheless, certain groups and individuals in America have begun to agitate the populace about the unfairness of a system that requires voter identification. The word \u201cracism\u201d is tossed around so easily by those intent on creating division and victimhood instead of unity. The energies of every faction of our society would be much better spent by legitimately analyzing the reasons why so many Americans don\u2019t vote and how we should address that issue, not only prior to a national election, but at all times.Tens of millions of Americans who could have voted did not during the latest election. In my travels and interactions with tens of thousands of Americans in recent months, it has become clear to me that many people have tuned out of the political process because they are disgusted with both parties. I\u2019ve been particularly saddened by the elderly individuals who told me that they are simply waiting to die and have given up on America.There are countries in the world, some with mandatory voting and some with voluntary voting, where the turnout of eligible voters is greater than 90 percent. The percentage of our population who vote has been declining steadily since the 1960s. This is a serious problem in a country that was designed for the people. In our latest national election, thousands of members of our military serving overseas were unable to obtain absentee ballots in a timely fashion and were essentially disenfranchised even though they were risking their lives for our freedom. This should be upsetting to every citizen in this country, but many have become so accustomed to news like this that it simply doesn\u2019t faze them anymore. I can go on with many examples of the inefficiencies and unfairness in a process that is essential to a democratic nation. Instead, let\u2019s turn our attention to some potential solutions, which tend to be much more efficacious than complaining.A great deal of the technology that would be necessary to properly identify voters and defeat voter fraud already exists. Almost everyone uses credit cards these days, and the transactions are done electronically. It is easy to obtain paper records of these electronic transactions upon request. Similarly, if voting is conducted using electronic machines, information could be collected in the same way that it is with credit cards. Voters, or people appointed to verify election results, could be provided with paper documentation. In fact, it would be wise to encourage every voter to take advantage of such verification. The necessary numbers and other identifying characteristics could be embedded in each voter\u2019s driver\u2019s license or national identification card.Another major barrier to voting is the wait in long lines, which frequently take hours to navigate. Voting often takes place in a school or a fire station, where entrance and egress are not conducive to moving large crowds. If large athletic facilities such as stadiums were used instead, huge numbers of people could be serviced relatively quickly by positioning electronic voting machines at multiple entrances. Instead of conducting the voters to various parts of the stadium for seating, this would facilitate their rapid exit.The process for voter registration should be no more complex than the process for obtaining a credit card. That process should be uniform throughout the nation, again, as it is with credit card applications. There is no need to reinvent the wheel every time we try to solve a problem. As a neurosurgeon, I frequently used techniques and ideas gathered from people in other disciplines to solve complex problems with great success.Using that same line of thinking, how should we deal with voter fraud and computer hackers attempting to alter results of elections? Some claim that this does not occur in any substantial way in the United States, which is like a burglar saying that theft is rare in order to discourage the placement of security measures. In Saudi Arabia, the incentive to engage in thievery is dampened significantly by a judicial system that imposes a penalty of loss of digits on the thief. I am not suggesting the same penalty in this country, but the concept of severe punishment likely would deter such acts if imposed in a consistent way.Hopefully, rather than trying to pick apart all of these suggestions, readers will be encouraged to add their voices and their intellect to arriving at solutions for this important problem.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.The recent Internal Revenue Service scandal should be a great cause of alarm for every thinking American.Many of the Founding Fathers fled to America because of the promise of freedom of speech and freedom of expression. In England and other monarchies, one could be imprisoned or killed for voicing opinions that differed from those of the rulers. If indeed we are willing to easily ignore government persecution of those who voice disagreement with its policies, then we are rapidly moving backward instead of forward in the quest for the freedom that was part of America\u2019s promise.We hear a lot in Washington these days about \u201cfairness.\u201d But there is nothing fair about targeting people or groups that disagree with the policies of the executive branch of government. There is nothing fair about a tax code filled with loopholes that can be exploited by those who can pay high-priced tax lawyers and accountants to find them. There is certainly nothing fair about a tax code that is so complex that it is virtually impossible to comply with every aspect of the thousands of pages of rules and regulations. Because of the complexity of this code, the government can target virtually anyone and find a mistake in their tax documents, which can be used to extort money or worse. We are talking of nothing less than the precursor of a totalitarian government.We now have every reason to call for tax reform. We need to strike while the iron is hot or everyone will soon adopt a laissez-faire attitude, and the corruption will continue unabated. Many alternative forms of taxation are used throughout the world, but the model that appeals most to me is based on biblical tithing. Under that system, everyone was required to pay one-tenth of their income to the designated authorities of the theocracy. You were not excused if you experienced a crop failure, nor were you asked to pay triple tithes if you had a bumper crop. Under this system, the man with the bumper crop obviously would pay a lot more in tithes than the man who experienced the crop failure.If we bring this concept forward to modern times and use the 10 percent model \u2014 although it could be any percentage \u2014 a Wall Street wizard who makes $10 billion a year would have to pay $1 billion, whereas a schoolteacher who makes $50,000 a year would have to contribute $5,000. Some would say this system would not be fair because it doesn\u2019t hurt the billionaire as much as it hurts the teacher. The problem with this line of reasoning is that no one can be completely objective in determining exactly how much each person should be hurt.Proportionality eliminates this dilemma and simplifies things to the point where we don\u2019t need complex agencies such as the IRS. Instead of trying to decide how much we need to hurt the billionaire, we should be grateful that his contributions are building roads and keeping bridges in good repair proportionately as much as the contributions of hundreds of teachers. Of course, the teachers are making other important contributions to society, and we recognize this by giving everybody the same rights regardless of their financial status. This kind of system can work only if we eliminate loopholes and make it truly fair.The other big plus for this proportional system of taxation is that everyone is included. We need to abandon the idea that some people are too needy and pitiful to be required to make contributions. I believe this is insulting to the poor, who may not have much money but certainly can possess dignity and self-respect. I can remember as a child getting my first paycheck and being proud and happy to make a contribution to my own well-being and that of the larger society.Furthermore, if everyone is included in the tax base, it forces the government to be more frugal with the taxpayers\u2019 money. Officials must answer to everyone, especially when they propose tax hikes. It is relatively easy to point the finger at a small group (the rich) and say, \u201cLet\u2019s get them.\u201d This type of attitude takes advantage of some of the more undesirable human traits, such as jealousy and envy. It plays into the politics of division, which does nothing to strengthen our nation but can be helpful to those interested only in political power.America has been and continues to be the most generous nation on earth. We love to help the less fortunate, and I hope we always care for our fellow man. We need to look for ways in which we can work together and reject all the forces that want to pull us apart. When we talk about \u201cliberty and justice for all,\u201d let\u2019s make sure we mean it.Ben S. Carson is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.I retired this month after 40 years of medical endeavors. There is little that can compare to the joy of being able to intervene in the lives of fellow human beings and in the vast majority of cases, save or improve those lives.For a long time, I thought that retirement would mean learning to play golf well, learning to play the organ and learning a variety of new languages. Maybe my second retirement will include those things, but as a physician, I could not walk away and forget about patients who were suffering, and by the same token, I cannot now embark upon a life of leisure and watch my beloved nation and fellow citizens suffer from many self-inflicted wounds.I revel in the opportunity to discuss many of the important issues of today even though many detractors will continue to try to put me in a box and say that I can only comment on things relevant to the field of neurosurgery. They are fond of saying \u201cthe good doctor is a terrific medical practitioner, but he can\u2019t possibly know anything about issues outside of medicine.\u201d\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tSEE ALSO: Dr. Ben Carson joins The Washington Times as a weekly columnist \n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\n\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t\tFive doctors signed the Declaration of Independence. Doctors were involved in framing the Constitution and in a host of our early legislative endeavors. It is totally untrue that only lawyers and politicians know how to conduct the affairs of the nation and, in fact, one could legitimately argue that this class of individuals is responsible for much of the turmoil that characterizes our current national psyche.As a neurosurgeon, I do know a little bit about the brain and its capacity. Our gigantic frontal lobes allow us as human beings to engage in rational thought processing. Other parts of the brain, including the limbic system, control our emotional side. The parts of our brain associated with rational thought processing are significantly more vast than the parts dealing with our emotional side. This, of course, means we are capable of swift and critical analysis of information and, like a computer, can compare that new information with our database and make rational decisions. It is this critical ability that can safeguard us against one of the most malignant and destructive tendencies our nation has ever faced: political correctness.Proponents of political correctness say it is a way that we can be kind and courteous to everyone, but they need to recognize that it is quite possible to be respectful without imposing an unspoken law that is antithetical to one of the founding principles of our nation \u2014 namely, freedom of expression and freedom of speech.Political correctness, which is vigorously enforced by much of the news media and many of our educational institutions, imposes a code of silence that prevents discussion of game-changing alterations of our fundamental social pillars. I was amused and saddened recently by the way the PC police intentionally took something I said out of context and distorted it in order to deviate the conversation away from what I was talking about and try to turn it into a conversation about me and whether or not I was a homophobe. This is a classical example of how this group works. I was asked whether I favor same-sex marriage. I said that I did not think that any group had the right to change the definition of a fundamental pillar of society.The point of my answer was that once we begin changing essential definitions, it will be difficult to draw a line in the sand that indicates we won\u2019t continue to change it beyond that point. My answer was not so much about homosexuals or any of the other groups that were mentioned, but rather about our need to maintain certain behavioral definitions and standards in order to preserve our identity. If we keep redefining our fundamental institutions, how will we or our progeny have a social anchor on which to base our behavior?The PC police tried to persuade people that I was comparing same-sex behavior with unacceptable forms of sexual variation. I was not making that comparison, but the speech minders insisted that it was my intention, as though they knew more about my intentions than I did. Their desire was to change the focus of the argument and to shut me up.It is eminently possible to extend to any two consenting adults the right to legally bind themselves together in a civil ceremony that extends property and visitation rights without altering the traditional definition of marriage. Just for the record, I completely support equal rights for everyone, including gays, but I don\u2019t think any group has the right to change fundamental pillars of society for everyone else in order to satisfy their own desires.We should stop submitting to political correctness and instead start engaging civil discussion. By doing so, we can arrive at logical solutions that work for everyone instead of retreating to our respective corners and throwing hand grenades at each other. We must not succumb to the forces that wish to divide and conquer us. There is a reason that we are called the United States of America.Dr. Benjamin S. Carson Sr. is professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins University.For much of the past century, America has embodied, both in word and in deed, a commitment to freedom and democracy that has improved the lives of billions of people all over the world.Leaders such as Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan saw the importance of a foreign policy based on American values and grounded in American leadership. They understood that smart, strategic engagement was the only way to ensure our security, champion our values and advance our interests.One of the most unstable and dangerous areas of the world today is the Middle East. Events that take place there have serious repercussions all across the globe that directly impact America's national security.In the Middle East, the United States must return to a position of global leadership -- mere engagement is not enough. And while multilateral diplomacy is important, it, too, is insufficient. The next American president must demonstrate principled leadership that truly reflects our values and protects our interests by demonstrating the strength and resolve necessary to ensure our security.Rogue regimes and their terrorist allies, sensing an opportunity, are expanding their influence in the Middle East. America's allies are deeply unsettled, worried that the enemies who provide a clear and present danger to them and to us believe that America is either unable or unwilling to counter their advances.We should not shy away from the responsibility that comes from being the world's lone superpower, nor should we subvert our own unique standing by stooping to embrace regimes opposed to our values that routinely express their hatred for us and sponsor terrorist attacks against our citizens. We must reverse the current course of our nation's policy in the Middle East by clearly demonstrating that we know where America stands and are unafraid to do what is required to protect our interests, our allies and ourselves.Iran's pursuit of nuclear weapons and hegemony in the Middle East threatens the already tenuous stability throughout the entire region. ISIS terrorists corrupt religion to justify murder, recruiting Western citizens to join in their jihad. A tyrannical regime clings to power in Syria, slaughtering tens of thousands of innocent civilians. Our closest ally in the Middle East, Israel, faces threats from all sides. Many of these challenges are extremely complex, and America cannot and should not confront all of them alone. But the path forward should involve leading from the front, rallying our allies behind our just cause.The convention proved to be a great stage for productive dialogue and conversation through various panels. Some of the topics discussed included housing, health care, law enforcement, corporate finance and education. I voiced my opinion on several of these issues, while also promoting the idea that the choices we make in this world have the most to do with our outcomes. Personal responsibility and self-determination -- not the household into which you are born, the police force in your neighborhood or the color of your skin -- are the key contributing factors of your life. Sharpton and I have the same goal: to build a brighter, stronger America that provides equal opportunities and access to the underserved and forgotten. However, we have a fundamental difference of opinion regarding the best way to achieve such an end. I know from my own experience of having been raised in dire poverty by a single mother that education has the power to bridge socio-economic divides and lift entire families out of destitution. My mother, who is the hero in my life, refused to embrace a victim mentality that many do in today's world. That is why I stress the importance of instilling in our children the mindset that they can accomplish anything if they do not think they are victims. Fifty years ago, this nation began a war on poverty that we have not come close to winning. This is due to the fact that rather than creating a system that lifts people out of a meager financial situation, we have developed a system that perpetuates generational dependence and an inability to escape hardship. The programs established throughout the years have not worked, because the implementation and follow-up procedures do not match the rhetoric heard in press conferences and announcements. When I was a young boy, I was not familiar with the concepts of financial literacy and responsibility. I did understand that luxury and a comfortable lifestyle -- two things I had no experience with -- would only be obtained by making myself valuable to society. After many difficulties in early childhood, I realized that the person who had the most to do with what happened to me in life was me. Now, as we sit here with formidable annual budget deficits and growing national debt, it is clear that the people who should be the most concerned about our future obligations are the young members of our society who will be saddled with massive taxes if we do not change our ways.During my college days, students were much more involved in what was going on in the country, and there were frequent marches and protests. Outside of the misguided Occupy Wall Street movement, there has not been much heard from the younger generations about current financial issues. It is essential for the next generation of young people to be exposed to and have a greater interest in what is occurring in our country and throughout the world, because it will profoundly affect their future. Our children and young adults should make their voices heard in order to create some guilt among the people of my generation who are voraciously spending the nation's future resources.An interest and assiduousness regarding the economy can be instilled through early teaching and exposure to the ideas I alluded to earlier: financial literacy and responsibility. Becoming an informed citizen when it comes to finance certainly makes you a wiser voter and can enhance all of life's experiences, from planning a career to raising a family. Knowledge of basic household economics is critical for all Americans, and preparing our youth with a financial skill set will enable them to plan for a prosperous future. Key principles like balancing a checkbook and knowing that you do not buy a house that costs more than two-and-a-half times your annual income could have saved many Americans from a mountain of adversity prior to the housing crisis.So what are some steps we can take to steer people in the right direction? On Jan. 29, 2010, President Barack Obama signed an executive order that created the President's Advisory Council on Financial Capability in order to help Americans in understanding financial matters. This council -- which comprises non-governmental representatives with finance-related experience, including financial services, consumer protection and financial access -- was also created to help people make informed financial choices in order to foster financial stability. Over the past few months in cities throughout the country, we have seen harsh moments that have been characterized as \"racial incidents.\" Whether it be Ferguson, Mo., New York City or Los Angeles, these events continue to occur in states regardless of which party dominates the political landscape. The three cities previously mentioned are considered Democratic strongholds, which shows us that this is a problem regardless of who is in charge. But what exactly is the problem? What are we missing, or is there something that we are not talking about enough? Can we say it is just one thing that can be summed up as police brutality? I think it would be ignorant to say there is just one thing that leads to situations like these. There are many things that we need to improve on as a nation. Better training for law enforcement is undoubtedly one of them. Police body cameras to record incidents would be a step in the right direction.There is also a dire need to devote substantial energy to what is going on in cities like Chicago, Detroit, New Orleans and Washington, D.C., where we witness a plethora of violence, shootings and murder all the time. Teenage pregnancy is all too prevalent in these areas, as well. As women give birth at a young age, it hinders their ability to continue their education due to the significant responsibility of caring for a child. Without the education required for jobs with reasonable wages, the children are eventually forced into poverty, and the cycle of dependence continues. I have said it before: We should focus on child-care facilities that would allow unwed mothers to get their general education development or higher degree and become self-supporting.Yes, education is the great divide in our country. A well-educated individual in America can usually write their own ticket in today's world, regardless of ethnicity, race, gender or financial status at birth. My whole medical career as a pediatric neurosurgeon was focused on young people and enhancing their lives. We would do everything we possibly could to not only give children longevity, but also quality of life. Now that I've retired from medicine, I am just as interested in the quality of their future. That is why it is so important to emphasize education. It also is very important for us to emphasize fiscal responsibility. Those of us who are adults today are in charge of the finances of tomorrow. Running up huge bills for our children to pay is being fiscally irresponsible.As we stand about 20 months out from Election Day 2016, I have much to learn in terms of becoming both a better candidate and a better potential president of the United States. I do not take the opportunity lightly. In fact, the decision to explore a candidacy for president was one of the most difficult decisions I have ever had to make. There was a lot on the line for my family and myself when we started this process. My family supported me wholeheartedly through an extremely busy and rewarding career as a medical surgeon for more than 30 years. I also enjoyed widespread public respect and admiration for my work. Why, at the end of what most would term an extremely blessed career, would I risk a lifetime of goodwill in order to run for president?The answer came down to whether my family and I felt there was a call to do something of service to the nation on a broader level. We knew going into the process that I am not your typical politician. I was primarily a doctor and a scientist used to dealing with facts in a clinical and dispassionate manner in order to heal people with rare and life-threatening abnormalities. I was far from a talking head or a political pundit or even a local politician with aspirations of one day making it to the political big leagues.And so we knew there would be a significant learning curve in terms of developing greater skill in communicating to a broad cross-section of the American people. We knew that certain issues we feel strongly about -- faith, family and the role of government -- might seem controversial when exposed to the 24/7, 365-day spin cycle that drives American media these days. It would have been easier to have spent some time in politician school taking spin classes, so to speak.But that's not really what we set out to do in creating this campaign. We felt strongly that the process of seeking a leadership mandate was something we needed to do publicly. We would engage the American people openly and seek feedback based on our ideas. We would also seek to develop a deeper understanding of the issues as they affect the lives of everyday citizens and reflect American values around the world. We would make mistakes, of course, but we would learn from them and grow stronger as a campaign.My basic framework on foreign policy, for example, is to meet our various treaty obligations head-on and send a clear message to our allies that we stand ready to defend them. Although I have visited the Baltic Rim and more than 57 other countries around the world, I am still in the stage of rapidly learning the intricacies of global politics. And those dynamics themselves are changing at an ever-increasing pace.A few decades ago, it would have been considered a luxury, but now it is truly a fixture of life. We seemingly would not be able to live without it -- despite the fact that the world did indeed operate without the Internet before its creation. This global system of interconnected computer networks that links billions of devices worldwide has changed the way we live our lives, for both the good and the bad. As millions of academic, business, social, government, private and public networks come together to provide and receive information, I find it rather remarkable how far we have come in the world of technology. Bravo to those who have helped us reach this place.I think it is worth discussing the issue of the new net neutrality rules concerning the Internet. When the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) voted to implement the new rules, which make Internet service providers treat all legal content equally, I immediately shuddered at the thought of more government control in our lives. Essentially, the government is going to regulate the Internet as a public utility so that content providers (such as Amazon and Netflix) cannot pay Internet service providers (like Comcast and Verizon) to deliver their content faster than others -- hence the term \"fast lanes.\" It is imperative that the government administer antitrust laws and safeguard consumers' ability to choose systems and Internet providers. But to restrict people from paying for something better or faster is not a sound idea. The Internet still has enormous room for growth and innovation, and net neutrality has the potential to suppress said innovation, as business models and novel approaches are hampered by governmental regulation.With so much potential for future Internet advancements, I frequently have been asked: \"What is the impact of technology on our lives, and what are some issues surrounding it?\" There obviously is a plethora of positive attributes associated with the Internet and what it enables us to do on a daily basis. We see the Internet utilized in law enforcement to aid our officers, as well as in our classrooms to educate our youth. But this truth-telling machine of the Internet -- what does it say about us as a world? Can it tell us why a war is imminent? Can it reveal our secrets and our leaders? Can we trust the Internet to be all things for us -- the identifier of our enemies and friends, of whom we should date and even marry?Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu showed great leadership when delivering his speech to a joint session of Congress regarding America's potential nuclear deal with Iran. History and our past relations with Netanyahu indicate that the prime minister has earned some trust, and no matter what side of the aisle we stand on, we must stand with Israel. Last December, I had the magnificent opportunity to travel to Israel and visit many historical sites of spiritual importance. After speaking with many Israeli citizens and witnessing firsthand the beauty of a nation with so much pride, I could not help but think of how we as the United States have a strong Judeo-Christian heritage. Israel is one of our strongest allies, and acknowledging the history that we share is important to our identity and to the promising value system we maintain. The country of Iran continues to conceal aspects of its nuclear program, and thus its compliance is heavily questioned. Iran's regime and its quest for nuclear weapons is not merely a Jewish problem, but rather it poses a substantial and realistic threat to world peace. As was expressed by Netanyahu, things undoubtedly will become worse if there is a deal that gives the Iranians protection and enables them to continue flagrantly operating secret nuclear facilities (as they had been doing in Natanz and Qom) while ostensibly invested in a diplomatic process with the United States. We must not allow them to continue to enrich uranium and maintain their enormous nuclear infrastructure. According to estimates, Iran could have 190,000 centrifuges enriching uranium within a matter of weeks. A \"breakout time\" to a nuclear bomb (\"breakout time\" referring to the amount of time it takes to accumulate enough weapons-grade uranium or plutonium for a nuclear bomb) would be approximately one year, according to U.S. assessment. In February of 2014, the Institute for Science and International Security estimated this time period to stand at roughly two months. Meanwhile, the IAEA (or the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is the United Nations' nuclear watchdog agency) continues to report that Iran refuses to be transparent with IAEA inspectors about its military nuclear program. The current deal with Iran allows for various concessions, including the inability to destroy any nuclear facilities, as well as enabling all restrictions on Iran's nuclear program to automatically expire in a decade. Does that sound comforting to you? Recently, I was temporarily placed on the Southern Poverty Law Center's watch list for extremism simply because I vocally support traditional marriage. I remember thinking: When did advocating for lifelong love between one man and one woman become a hate crime? Fortunately, the group saw the folly of its ways and apologized, removing me from the list.It was a small battle, a blip in the daily life of someone who has entered the political arena. And I enjoyed the support of many who rallied in the conservative media to my cause to help reverse such a silly distinction. But it wasn't that long ago when liberal extremism tried to suffocate traditional values, and there were few media voices to come to the rescue.There was one, though, so powerful and elegant, persistent yet graceful. Her name is Phyllis Schlafly. And for the past 90 years she has been a tireless advocate for the nuclear family, for traditional marriage and for common-sense conservatism that resists injecting government into every aspect of our lives. On Wednesday night, she will be honored at the Paul Weyrich Awards dinner that precedes the start of the annual Conservative Political Action Conference.Schlafly fought battles most lacked the courage to fight, and time and again she won. She has been credited for single-handedly stopping the Equal Rights Amendment, which in the 1970s was racing on a media freight train toward ratification. Schlafly stopped it dead in its tracks. It was not because she didn't believe women deserve rights, but rather because she rightfully recognized the ERA was skewed toward favoring young professional women, and that it would punish middle-aged and older women who chose to stay at home and raise their families by taking away \"dependent wife\" benefits under Social Security and alimony.In those days, it took courage and lots of hard work to roll back what a liberal media had started in motion. But Schlafly succeeded because she was intellectually honest, impassioned and skilled in not only communicating the fight, but also in waging it. Likewise, she has relentlessly fought for life, recognizing early on that the Roe v. Wade decision would be one of the Supreme Court's worst decisions.Through good and bad economic times, and the ebb and flow of conservative activism, Phyllis Schlafly has remained a steady voice for common sense and traditional values. Her speeches, books, TV appearances and radio commentaries blazed the way for modern conservatism while also protecting the rights of traditional families from the onslaught of Hollywood's culture wars.The graphic pictures of a Jordanian pilot being burned alive by militants from the Islamic State, or ISIS, were chilling and raised doubts about the humanity of the Islamic terrorists capable of such barbarism. This coupled with beheadings and crucifixions gives us a better understanding of the evil we, along with the rest of the world, are facing.These terrorists have stated their intention to annihilate Israel and to destroy the American way of life, which they consider corrupt and evil. Undoubtedly, we in America have our faults like every other country inhabited by human beings, but it requires the suspension of knowledge of accurate American history to believe, as some do, that we are the source of much of the trouble in the world. Conditions in the world have improved more dramatically since the advent of the United States than at any other time in human history. Our innovation and compassion have provided one of the highest standards of living in the world while lifting conditions in many other nations.Understanding that we are not evil makes it easier to identify evil elsewhere and to combat it effectively. When we accept the falsehood that everyone is equally bad, and, therefore, we have no right or obligation to interfere with atrocities occurring elsewhere in the world, we facilitate the development and growth of groups such as ISIS, which are not dissimilar to the adherents of Adolf Hitler, who also aspired to world domination. An objective analysis of American history will demonstrate that we were late in joining the efforts of others to combat evil during both World War I and World War II. Hopefully, we have learned from these mistakes that it is better to fight enemies while they are in their adolescent stages than to wait until they have fully matured and pose a much greater threat.I certainly do not believe that we need to involve ourselves in every conflict on the planet, and I believe we involved ourselves in the Vietnam conflict without clear goals or strategies. Hopefully, we learned from that experience that it is neither wise nor correct to try to impose our way of life on others. I also believe that there were better ways to handle Saddam Hussein than a full-fledged military confrontation. Those better ways would have involved a plan for Iraqi leadership over the long term. These unfortunate experiences have made some gun-shy to the point that they probably would rather be invaded than adopt an offensive war posture.There has been much debate recently over vaccination mandates, particularly in response to the measles outbreak currently taking place throughout the country.At this juncture, there have been 102 confirmed measles cases in the U.S. during 2015, with 59 of them linked to a December 2014 visit to the Disneyland theme park in Southern California. (It is important to note that 11 of the cases associated with Disneyland were detected last year and, consequently, fall within the 2014 measles count.) This large outbreak has spread to at least a half-dozen other states, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is currently requesting that all health care professionals \"consider measles when evaluating patients with febrile rash and ask about a patient's vaccine status, recent travel history and contact with individuals who have febrile rash illness.\"One must understand that there is no specific antiviral therapy for measles and that 90 percent of those who are not vaccinated will contract measles if they are indeed exposed to the virus. This explains why Arizona health officials are monitoring more than 1,000 people after potential exposure to measles. These are pretty staggering numbers that should concern not only parents and children, but also the general populace.I have been asked many times throughout the past week for my thoughts concerning the issue of vaccines. The important thing is to make sure the public understands that there is no substantial risk from vaccines and that the benefits are very significant. Although I strongly believe in individual rights and the rights of parents to raise their children as they see fit, I also recognize that public health and public safety are extremely important in our society. Certain communicable diseases have been largely eradicated by immunization policies in this country. We should not allow those diseases to return by forgoing safety immunization programs for philosophical, religious or other reasons when we have the means to eradicate them.Obviously, there are exceptional situations to virtually everything, and we must have a mechanism whereby those can be heard. Nevertheless, there is public policy and health policy that we have to pay attention to regarding this matter. We already have policies in place at schools that require immunization records -- this is a positive thing. Studies have shown over the course of time that the risk-benefit ratio for vaccination is grossly in favor of being vaccinated as opposed to not. In his recent State of the Union address, President Obama was upbeat and inspiring, particularly if a listener had no prior knowledge of his many speeches that were quite similar but bore no fruit. It almost appeared that he was living in an alternate universe that bore no resemblance to present-day America and the current global stage.He boasted that the economy was doing very well and that unemployment had been cut in half since he took office. Perhaps someone should educate him about the labor force participation rate, which is at its lowest point in the past 36 years and reflects the number of people who are actually working versus the number of people who are eligible to work. The unemployment rate can easily be manipulated in whichever direction one desires by including and excluding certain groups of people.He also boasted about the record-high stock market numbers. He failed to indicate that savings accounts and certain types of bonds, which used to be the mechanism whereby average Americans could enhance their net worth over a long period of time, were no longer appealing, and that the stock market was one of the few places where gains could be made. While the stock market has always been particularly relevant to the wealthier members of society, the influx of these smaller investors is further driving the income gap.He talked about the need to further tax the rich because they are not paying their fair share. He failed to mention that the top 1 percent pays 37 percent of the federal income taxes, while earning 19 percent of the income. Since he is so concerned about fairness, perhaps he should consider a proportional (flat) tax, which hits everyone according to their ability to pay. To make this even more fair, we could eliminate all loopholes.His claim that we are winning the war against terrorism, even though he failed to mention the name of the radical Islamists who are behind the terror, was almost laughable in light of its rapid growth and spread throughout the world. He appeared not to recognize that our premature withdrawal of troops from Iraq was a mistake that facilitated the development of the Islamic State. His bravado about chasing the terrorists and eliminating them bears no resemblance to his actual policies and demonstrates his contempt for the intelligence of his audience.He demonstrated great courage in talking about how the Affordable Care Act is actually resulting in a reduction in health care spending. This may be true on some levels, but the reason for that decreased spending is secondary to the reluctance of people to seek medical care when they have deductibles of thousands of dollars. One of their proposals involves the establishment of police-sponsored athletic leagues throughout the city. There would be friendly competition between the teams, which would be composed of community residents and police. This would, of course, allow both sides to get a chance to know each other and form a relationship that is not adversarial.Most of human societal progress is accomplished through relationships. People who are traditional adversaries can rapidly become friends when they work together, get to know each other and develop positive relationships. This opens the doors to communication, and people tend to give each other the benefit of the doubt when they know them. On the other hand, when communication breaks down, as it frequently does before divorce, the two previously friendly partners often become bitter enemies.I have no doubt that solutions like this one and others proposed by Mullins would be very helpful not only in New York City, but also across the nation. Unfortunately, there are those in our society who will continue to endeavor to stir up strife and fuel hatred. These individuals wish to create dissatisfaction in almost all areas of American life. Thus, we have a war on women, age wars, income wars, race wars and religious wars. If it appears that our society is falling apart at the seams, it creates more fertile ground for a fundamental change. This divide-and-conquer strategy has proved effective for many groups wishing to topple a prevailing culture over the years. It also will be effective in creating chaos and anarchy in our society if we do not begin to more carefully analyze and control our emotional reactions.If, like Mullins and Bernard, we are willing to sit down and rationally discuss solutions to our differences, we can build a bond of unity that would be stronger than the inevitable conflicts that accompany life in a complex society. Yes, it does require conviction, effort and even some humility to be willing to make oneself vulnerable enough to invest in a relationship with someone previously unknown. The alternative of continued and worsening hatred and violence makes such a risk extremely worthwhile for all parties involved.The U.S Constitution was designed to preserve the freedom and rights of all citizens. Our Declaration of Independence states that all men are created equal and that we have certain God-given rights. With documents like these, how have we arrived at the state of such discord between purported haves and have-nots in our society?Some will try, of course, to discount any discussion of this topic by talking about the treatment of slaves, indentured servants, Native Americans and others who historically were not treated well. I am willing to acknowledge that the same human frailties that characterized societies throughout the world found their way into America, but it is unfair to demonize a nation and its many constituents based on the shortcomings of some of its members. Those who condemn America for its past seldom talk about the tremendous good and generosity that have been demonstrated by the country that cannot be denied the title of most benign pinnacle nation in the history of the world.One of the reasons that I find the concept of royalty and celebrity amusing is watching people putting on airs and trying to act like someone special when they are acutely aware that, in fact, they are just like everyone else. In my opinion, either everyone is special, or no one is special. America is supposed to be a place of equality, and whether a person is homeless or a billionaire, he should be treated well and equally. There is no social class or political class that has the right to lord it over everyone else unless \"we the people\" confer such power upon them or allow them to confer it upon themselves without resistance.Obviously, the billionaire can afford to pay for certain things like luxurious homes and cars and the best seats on airplanes and at the theater. There is nothing wrong with that. It should not cause resentment in a society in which anyone is free to work hard and use their God-given talents to excel and increase their own value in the marketplace. Some will not admit it, but our society would be pretty dreary if everyone shared the same level of poverty with no chance of advancing themselves economically through their own efforts.It was extremely encouraging to see the United States and Sony eventually stand up to the cyberbullying of the North Koreans by allowing the movie \"The Interview\" to be released despite threats of retaliation.Freedom of speech and freedom of expression are hallmarks of American life, and we must jealously guard these values from both internal and external threats. In fact, all of the freedoms guaranteed to American citizens by our Constitution must be steadfastly preserved, or they will be eroded. Vigilance and courage are necessary every day if we are to remain a free society.I am proud of the president of the United States for taking a tough stand on this issue, although I am not sure that his promise of proportional retaliation is the correct answer. The response should go far beyond proportionality, and an example should be made of the perpetrators by using a host of available options to inflict punishment not be easily forgotten. If we use proportionality as our standard, future adversaries need only consider certain consequences for encroaching on our rights. If, on the other hand, they realize that they will suffer enormous consequences, I believe their adventurism would be tempered.I do not advocate becoming a bully on the global stage, but I do believe that strength is a quality that is respected by all cultures, regardless of their ideological bent. I remember how much trouble students in my high school in Detroit caused the weak teachers who had no idea of how to control them. There was one teacher, 5 feet tall, who tolerated no foolishness and even the burly football players feared her. You could hear a pin drop in her room, though the same students produced total chaos in other classrooms. She was extremely nice to me and the other cooperative students and would go out of her way to ensure we received a good education. I think the lesson here is obvious.There was a time when American citizens were relatively safe, no matter where they traveled in the world. Everyone knew that there would be significant consequences for harming Americans. Today, not only is the fear gone, but there is little respect for our leaders because our nation appears to be a paper tiger. This is a situation that can be quickly rectified with courageous and principled leadership. Many will remember the Iran hostage crisis in the late 1970s and early 1980s. During that time, we had a president who was neither feared nor respected. On the day Ronald Reagan was inaugurated as president, the hostages were released.Like many other Americans, I have always had a desire to travel to Israel and visit firsthand the many historical sites of spiritual significance. I was recently afforded the opportunity to fulfill that desire and was not disappointed.In addition to being greatly inspired, I spoke with numerous Israeli citizens from a variety of backgrounds. One overwhelming theme in those conversations was the feeling of abandonment by the United States government. Some of the more diplomatic individuals said they felt sidelined by a U.S. government that had more important issues to deal with. Of course, they had not forgotten the times that our military and financial aid saved them from utter defeat at the hands of their numerous local enemies.We must remember that Israel is a small country, about the size of New Jersey, with only 8 million people. It is surrounded by Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea, with several other hostile nations in proximity. Enemy forces are in control of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, which consists primarily of Samaria and Judea. If not for the Iron Dome missile defense system, the multitudinous rockets launched at Israel this summer from Gaza would have wreaked unimaginable damage on the tiny country. Many Israelis believe, probably correctly, that the aggressiveness of the hostile nations surrounding them is increased when the perception exists that we in the United States are not seriously committed to their protection.Some will say we have no more of an obligation to Israel than we do to any other country in the Middle East. Perhaps they have forgotten that Israel is one of our staunchest allies and has collaborated with us on many innovative and mutually beneficial products. Having a strong and dependable military ally in what is arguably the most problematic area of the world right now is certainly a tremendous benefit. As a nation, we have a strong Judeo-Christian heritage, which is important to our identity and the strong value system that once characterized our nation. Furthermore, other nations watch how we treat our longtime ally, since that might serve as a harbinger of how we would treat them.It already had been documented extensively that three suspects were waterboarded and that sleep deprivation and other such techniques were used to extract vital information from terrorists. Though the report says otherwise, that information played a part in the apprehension or annihilation of many upper-echelon terrorist leaders, including Osama bin Laden. The high-profile release of this information at a time when we are engaged in war with various terrorist groups demonstrates a profound lack of wisdom because this information will undoubtedly be used as an effective recruitment tool by our enemies.Some of the people responsible for the release of this report have publicly acknowledged that it could put members of the military and other Americans at significant risk because they could now become prized targets for revenge. It seems likely that the unwise timing of this information release was politically motivated, seeing as control of the Senate will be in Republican hands in January.This is a prime example of a potentially lethal disease that has infected Washington, called blind partisanship. It is exhibited when people are more concerned about damaging the other party or enhancing their own party than they are about the welfare of their nation. Of course, we should all be concerned about cruel and unusual treatment of any human being, but we must have enough common sense to recognize that it is foolish to do anything that contributes to the long-term weakening of our military efforts, especially when we are engaged in a war, even though some may not want to call it that.As a pediatric neurosurgeon, I became more than familiar with situations where parents experience the premature loss of a child. There are few things that can compare to the emotional devastation that accompanies such an event. This makes the varied emotional responses of Michael Brown's family more understandable as the tragic events unfolded in Ferguson, Mo. What is difficult to understand, though, is the benefit that the Ferguson community derives from burning and looting business establishments in their own neighborhoods, especially when unemployment is already a problem. In the meantime, the outside agitators in many cases are sitting in their hotel rooms sipping wine and watching the carnage on television.Hopefully, people in communities such as Ferguson, like people all over America, are beginning to awaken and realize that they should be more than pawns in the hands of manipulators who, in reality, could not care less about them.If the outside agitators and manipulators truly cared about Brown and his family, they would have initiated manifestations of concern long before the political spotlight brought attention and prestige to their cause. They would be outraged about the dozens of young men like Brown who die violent non-police-related deaths in cities throughout America every day. They would be emphasizing education, which is the great divide between the haves and the have-nots in America. A well-educated individual in America today can usually write their own ticket, regardless of ethnicity or financial status at birth.Perhaps it would be useful to highlight the fact that the average American lives to be about 80 years of age. The first 20 to 25 years are spent either preparing oneself through education or not preparing. If you prepare appropriately, you have 55 to 60 years to reap the benefits. If you fail to prepare, you have 55 to 60 years to suffer the consequences. This is not to say that every component of our society should not be involved in trying to produce good outcomes for all of our young people. But we need to emphasize that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you in life is you. We must resist the victim mentality that is peddled by so many agitators and manipulators. If you believe you are a victim, you are, and you begin to act like a victim. This renders you an easy target for manipulation -- even the kind that produces completely irrational and self-injurious behavior.\nWhat is difficult to understand, though, is the benefit that the Ferguson community derives from burning and looting business establishments in their own neighborhoods, especially when unemployment is already a problem. In the meantime, the outside agitators in many cases are sitting in their hotel rooms sipping wine and watching the carnage on television.Hopefully, people in communities such as Ferguson, like people all over America, are beginning to awaken and realize that they should be more than pawns in the hands of manipulators who, in reality, could not care less about them.If the outside agitators and manipulators truly cared about Brown and his family, they would have initiated manifestations of concern long before the political spotlight brought attention and prestige to their cause. They would be outraged about the dozens of young men like Brown who die violent non-police-related deaths in cities throughout America every day. They would be emphasizing education, which is the great divide between the haves and the have-nots in America. A well-educated individual in America today can usually write their own ticket, regardless of ethnicity or financial status at birth.Perhaps it would be useful to highlight the fact that the average American lives to be about 80 years of age. The first 20 to 25 years are spent either preparing oneself through education or not preparing. If you prepare appropriately, you have 55 to 60 years to reap the benefits. If you fail to prepare, you have 55 to 60 years to suffer the consequences. This is not to say that every component of our society should not be involved in trying to produce good outcomes for all of our young people. But we need to emphasize that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you in life is you. We must resist the victim mentality that is peddled by so many agitators and manipulators. If you believe you are a victim, you are, and you begin to act like a victim. This renders you an easy target for manipulation -- even the kind that produces completely irrational and self-injurious behavior.Like millions of other Americans, I appreciate the plight of billions of people throughout the world who would like nothing more than to find themselves in the United States, where they could enjoy a much higher standard of living and wonderful opportunities for advancement.It certainly seems like a compassionate thing to offer them legal status in America and the opportunity to pursue their dreams. It should first be considered, however, that we have millions of people already mired in dire poverty in our inner cities, rural townships and places such as Appalachia who would certainly appreciate a helping hand before we extend one to foreigners. The same principle is seen when you board an airplane and hear the announcement, \"In case of an emergency, oxygen masks will drop from the ceiling. Put yours on first, and then administer help to those around you.\" There are many around us already in need of help.According to President Obama, only those five million or so illegals who have been in America for five years or more will benefit from his largesse. He indicates that they will not be eligible for health care and other benefits. Obviously, this fits right into the same category as his promise: \"If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.\" Once illegals have legal status, it will be difficult to deny them any of the multitudinous entitlements that are freely distributed throughout our society. Also, we must remember that illegals who have been here for less than five years only have to claim that they have been here longer than that in order to collect goodies. In effect, instead of helping five million people, we probably will be aiding at least twice that many. Even this would not be a problem if we had plenty of money. The sad fact is our national debt is approaching $18 trillion. If you paid that back at a rate of $1 billion per day, it would take nearly 50 years. Many powerful nations before us have met their fate through fiscal irresponsibility. What makes our leaders think we are immune from the destructive forces of a shaky financial foundation?\nIt certainly seems like a compassionate thing to offer them legal status in America and the opportunity to pursue their dreams. It should first be considered, however, that we have millions of people already mired in dire poverty in our inner cities, rural townships and places such as Appalachia who would certainly appreciate a helping hand before we extend one to foreigners. The same principle is seen when you board an airplane and hear the announcement, \"In case of an emergency, oxygen masks will drop from the ceiling. Put yours on first, and then administer help to those around you.\" There are many around us already in need of help.According to President Obama, only those five million or so illegals who have been in America for five years or more will benefit from his largesse. He indicates that they will not be eligible for health care and other benefits. Obviously, this fits right into the same category as his promise: \"If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.\" Once illegals have legal status, it will be difficult to deny them any of the multitudinous entitlements that are freely distributed throughout our society. Also, we must remember that illegals who have been here for less than five years only have to claim that they have been here longer than that in order to collect goodies. In effect, instead of helping five million people, we probably will be aiding at least twice that many. Even this would not be a problem if we had plenty of money. The sad fact is our national debt is approaching $18 trillion. If you paid that back at a rate of $1 billion per day, it would take nearly 50 years. Many powerful nations before us have met their fate through fiscal irresponsibility. What makes our leaders think we are immune from the destructive forces of a shaky financial foundation?Jonathan Gruber set off a firestorm of controversy, at least in the conservative media, with the recent revelation of his comments about the \"stupidity of the American people,\" which allowed the Affordable Care Act to be passed. In essence, he admitted that the bill was written in a way that would allow its purveyors to characterize it as the cure-all and salvation for a health care system that was in trouble, with no danger of their deception being discovered by a populace that is trusting and naive. He obviously never intended for his comments to make it into the public sphere and did not consider the fact that someone is always recording on their smartphone.What is truly disturbing is the fact that our government is willing to engage in the purposeful deception of the populace in order to thrust its secretive agenda onto an unsuspecting populace and a sycophantic mainstream media. As I have said many times before, Obamacare was never about health care; it was about government control and wealth redistribution. If there was real concern about the uninsured, it would have been much cheaper and considerably less complex to simply give all of the uninsured Cadillac health plans for life. I am a firm believer that health care reform was and is needed, and I have been advocating for it for several years. It needs to be done correctly, though, and in a way that does not create different levels of access and treatment.There is no question that the American people are distracted by sports and entertainment and that we confer godlike status on actors and some athletes. There is also no question that we could do more to enhance our knowledge about important issues. However, to assume that the American people are stupid and uncaring and to design programs and speeches around that assumption is arrogant, disrespectful and, frankly, very shortsighted. As has famously been said, \"You can fool some of the people all of the time and all of the people some of the time, but you can't fool all of the people all of the time.\"President Obama's decision to act unilaterally outside of Congress is not the answer. Instead, Congress must use its lawmaking powers to fix a system that is so broken that only a legislative solution can fix it. The lack of policy progress has been incredibly frustrating, and the humanitarian border crisis this summer only highlighted how badly we need a system that deals efficiently and effectively with both illegal and legal immigration.It is time for Congress to act and to do so in a bipartisan fashion that engenders the confidence of the American people. There are many common-sense prescriptions within reach of our government. It is time to seize them.To begin to solve this problem, we must first have some understanding of why it exists. Despite all of its problems, America is still the place of dreams. As such, it is small wonder that so many from other nations would like to live here.Right now, we have very porous borders and unenthusiastic and inconsistent enforcement of immigration laws. Further incentives for illegal immigration are easy enrollment in public schools, easy employment for those willing to take jobs others don't want, easy access to health care and easy acquisition of public support through welfare programs. Yet this population cannot participate in the formal workforce, which means they cannot contribute fully to their local economies.Any discussion of immigration reform should include bipartisan solutions that both address the undocumented population here today and discourage illegal immigration going forward. If these issues are not addressed, solutions will fall short. On the other hand, if all of these issues are addressed firmly and consistently, we can uphold the rule of law and discourage further illegal immigration. Detractors will say that if it were that simple, it already would have been done and we wouldn't be having this discussion. What they fail to account for is the fact that the issues have not been addressed.With so much at stake, millions of Americans still did not participate in the midterm elections this week.When the governing structure of our nation was put together, the Founders were excited about the prospect of a nation that placed the needs and desires of its citizens on a higher pedestal than those of the government itself. They also warned that it might be difficult to maintain such a government without it morphing into the usual \"government knows best\" model in place in most other countries of the world.Some may think that a government that seldom interferes with the lives of its citizens and encourages entrepreneurship, growth, personal responsibility and independence is only wishful thinking and not practical. (They have resigned themselves to the ever increasing and controlling government we have now.) Nevertheless, the early years of America had such a government, and as a result, the nation rose from the habitat of an assorted group of courageous intellectuals supported by a ragtag militia in 1776 to the most dominant economic power in the world in less than 100 years.What has created the malaise that characterizes so many potential American voters today? I have encountered hundreds of thousands of my fellow citizens on the road over the past year, and I have been struck by the level of animosity toward both major political parties and the feeling that nothing will improve -- regardless of which party is in power. There is also a massive lack of trust in our federal government, which greatly dampens enthusiasm for voter participation. Many others feel that their single vote means nothing. Therefore, exercising their civic responsibility is a waste of time.The real question for conservatives after the gains they have made is whether they are going to put forth an aggressive agenda with the goals of spurring economic growth, reestablishing global leadership, and providing encouragement and mechanisms for the downtrodden to capitalize on the ideas of personal responsibility. They also should propose a well-defined and intelligible alternative to Obamacare, develop our abundant natural resources in an environmentally friendly way, and reform the monstrous tax code, among other things. Or are they simply going to try to block additional unconstitutional executive action and hope this will further endear them to the populace?When I look at our nation's massive federal debt, it is clear that Washington has chronically misdiagnosed the situation, which has resulted in a seemingly never-ending cycle of borrowing and spending. Much like a life-threatening disease, if the underlying cause is left unaddressed, patient recovery seldom occurs.Bold leaders in both parties have warned for years that entitlement spending is the major driver of unsustainable deficits, and they have further advised that Washington implement policies to address this problem. While it is distressing to see continued inaction, what troubles me more is that virtually no one has addressed the underlying cause. In other words, why were programs created in a manner that they would eventually become so financially upside-down that our entire economy would be in jeopardy? Furthermore, can and should we do something to ensure that future entitlement programs are created carefully and responsibly?Let's look at recent history. In the past 10 years, projected deficits for entitlements created long ago, such as Social Security and Medicare, have grown dramatically. In fact, existing entitlement programs consume about 60 percent of all federal spending. During this time, much political effort has been expended -- unsuccessfully -- trying to reform these programs. I'm not saying this wasn't an important effort. But, if these programs are not reformed soon, they will consume 100 percent of projected federal revenue within the next three decades. Imagine that: Our children and grandchildren either will be faced with a federal government that has no money for defense, roads and education, or the tax burden will double on citizens.Sadly, while Congress was busy failing to fix these existing problems, it passed two new entitlement programs, both of which will only worsen our budgetary shortfalls. These programs create permanent commitments by the federal government to provide expensive services to people indefinitely, regardless of whether the nation can afford to do so. So, not only have we failed to stop the bleeding, but we also have managed to cause significantly more.The recent questionably unconstitutional moves by the Houston city council to subpoena the sermons of five area ministers, as well as internal correspondence dealing with social issues, should have the American Civil Liberties Union and everyone else who believes in free speech and religious freedom up in arms.We as Americans must guard every aspect of our Constitution and recognize when it is being threatened. One of the great dangers in America today is extreme intolerance in the name of tolerance. For example, in this Houston case, it is presupposed that the pastors in question may have said something that was objectionable to the homosexual community. In order to prove that we are tolerant of the homosexual lifestyle, we as a society allow gays to be intolerant of anyone who disagrees with them in any way. Of course, gays should be able to live in any manner they choose as long as it does not infringe on the rights of anyone else. And of course, ministers should be able to preach according to the dictates of their conscience as long as they are not forcing others to listen. This concept of \"live and let live\" is an essential ingredient of harmonious living in a diverse society. We cannot single out the side we want to castigate for intolerance while letting the other side get away with it without comment.Perhaps it is time for Americans to take an honest look at what it means to live peacefully in a diverse society composed of people with many different points of view. This requires true tolerance, which includes being capable of listening to people with views that might differ from yours.Many of us who are Christians have strong beliefs that inform our thinking on many issues, but in no way should those beliefs lead us to demonize or treat others unfairly. The same applies to Muslims, Jews, every other religious group and atheists. When our universities attempt to shield students from hearing the opinions of those with whom the administration disagrees, they are not only being intolerant, but are teaching the next generation those same destructive ideas that will eventually dissolve the cohesiveness of our society and lead to our downfall.It should come as no surprise to most thinking people that Wal-Mart, like many other large employers, recently announced it would be suspending health-care benefits for part-time workers. This is really a double hit on workers: In many cases, they previously had full-time jobs with 40-hour workweeks before being reduced to part-time status and now losing their health benefits.The \"Affordable Care Act,\" which probably seems less affordable to most Americans as we find out more about it, is the cause of this unnecessary misery. When the employer mandate, which is part of Obamacare, is activated early next year, tens of millions more Americans will face dramatic hikes in the cost of the health care they currently receive or will lose it altogether. The current administration understood that this would happen, which occasioned the issuing of several executive orders delaying the implementation of the employer mandate until after the November 2014 elections.The thing that is most disturbing to me about this government-manufactured attack on the well-being of hardworking American citizens is the apparent contempt for the intelligence of the American populace. These kinds of maneuvers assume that many citizens are not bright enough to realize they are being manipulated politically and that things that impact them so negatively are being pushed off until after an election, when they willingly give their votes to the very people who are using them.The same slick politicians who convinced large portions of the populace that Obamacare would be the panacea for all of their medical needs, and that you could keep your doctor and your insurance if you were satisfied with them, also told us that the IRS scandal was phony and that pertinent records and emails coincidentally disappeared from the computers of the main people under suspicion. They also want people to believe the tragedy in Benghazi was the result of an inflammatory video and that anyone questioning the veracity of such a scenario is clearly a partisan troublemaker who dislikes the current administration.The list of problems is too long for this article, but any objective individual would not have a difficult time understanding that Americans are faced with a less than honest government, as well as a press that has forgotten why it is protected by the First Amendment. The Founders envisioned the press as an ally of the people, rather than an arm of a political ideology. All of us, including the press, must learn the difference between policies that are pro-America and anti-America, and to recognize those that are meant to benefit a particular party.Other nations, such as England, have gone so far as to ban flights emanating from the affected regions of Africa. The Centers for Disease Control and various infectious-disease specialists have done a yeoman's job in their efforts to prevent infected individuals in our country from contaminating others. They have put excellent protocols in place that would virtually guarantee complete safety. Unfortunately, all of those valiant efforts cannot preclude human error, which remains an ever-present danger, regardless of intellect.For this reason, I and many others are not comfortable with the idea of bringing infected individuals into our midst when we can readily treat them elsewhere and happily receive them back once the infectious danger has passed. When one does a logical benefit-to-risk analysis, it is clear that the worst things that could happen by intentionally bringing this dangerous disease to America are far worse than the best things that could happen. Some say if we bring infected individuals here, it will accelerate research endeavors and a potential cure or effective vaccination. Others say not bringing infected citizens back demonstrates an insensitivity toward wonderful people who risk their lives for others. I am sympathetic to these arguments, and if we did not have safer alternatives, they would convince me.Perhaps we should be concentrating on stopping the spread of Ebola in Africa and eradicating it from Earth. Like the war on terrorism, we should fight it elsewhere to decrease the likelihood of needing to fight it here. African lives are every bit as valuable as lives in America or anywhere else, and this humanitarian crisis has enormous health implications for the whole world. If, as some officials say, bringing infected individuals back here expedites the acquisition of knowledge that could lead to a cure, as all components of the disease could be more carefully studied, why not transport more researchers and facilities to the heart of the epidemic and dramatically accelerate the process?I have no desire to induce panic, but we must realize that some viruses are known to undergo mutations that make them even more virulent. If the Ebola virus becomes even more pathologic, the ensuing panic and destruction of human life could go far beyond what is currently being acknowledged. This means there is some urgency to getting the outbreak in Africa under control.This country was intentionally designed to be different from others in which a monarch or strong central government controlled almost every aspect of the lives of its citizens. In most other nations, the lives of the populace conform to the will of the government. In America, the government is supposed to conform to the will of the people. Also in most other countries, it was declared that the rights of the people were conferred by the government; whereas, our founding documents indicate a belief that our rights derive from our Creator, a.k.a. God.It is critical that the people of our country understand that we the people are at the pinnacle of power in a nation created of, by and for the people. In order to exercise that power in a responsible manner, the people must be informed voters. To cast votes for people or issues about which one knows little or nothing is akin to taking unlabeled medicine from an unknown source simply because someone told you to do so. It is also unfortunate that many schools no longer offer civics courses and that students are not taught the fundamentals of how our government works. This partly explains the incredibly uninformed answers to basic questions on some televised \"man on the street\" interviews. The founders of our nation were huge advocates of education and felt that our freedoms and system of government would be jeopardized by an uninformed populace that could be easily manipulated by dishonest politicians or a biased press.I hate to complain without offering solutions. Thus, my wife and I have just released a new e-book (soon to be a paperback) titled, \"One Vote: Make Your Voice Heard.\" Thousands of free copies are being distributed, and the purchase price is less than that of a simple sandwich. It is completely nonpartisan and was written for people who, for whatever reason, missed out on important information with respect to becoming an informed voter. There are electronic links to websites that not only identify your representatives, but also tell you how they voted, as opposed to how they said they voted, on a variety of issues. It provides access to links that help you clearly identify your own beliefs and compare them with those of political figures and parties. This kind of information will make it easier for people to think for themselves, rather than being herded and manipulated by those in various political organizations who hunger for power, not liberty and fairness.Growing up in inner-city America, I witnessed many instances of premature death, usually inflicted by other inner-city residents. I also witnessed many stories of triumph that produced successful individuals out of the same environment. Perhaps it would be worthwhile to study the factors that led to success instead of tragedy in the same environment. Obviously, volumes have been written about this topic, on which many consider themselves experts. In many cases, the observations and analyses are accurate and thought-provoking, and in many cases, they are cowardly and pandering.There is a long list of factors highly correlated with success regardless of the environment. They include strong supportive families, a sense of personal responsibility, good role models, faith that produces a sense of purpose and values, hard work, confidence, courage, an emphasis on education, and caring neighbors. As many who have read some of my books know, I have written volumes on all of these topics, and all are deserving of much attention, but in this limited article, I will focus on the last three.We live in an increasingly technical world, where knowledge is power. Even in an economy that is stagnant, it is still relatively easy to obtain a good job when one has acquired the requisite knowledge and skills. Many sophisticated jobs go begging or have to be filled by foreigners because we are not producing technical graduates in sufficient numbers. We must also look at successful educational models, including charter schools, and insist that they be made available to inner-city students. There are a number of excellent reading-room programs throughout the country that incentivize students, particularly from Title I schools, to learn to enjoy reading, which profoundly decreases the dropout rate later on. Lack of education in this country is a major barrier between the haves and the have-nots, and we must concentrate on it.Imagine that. A journalist -- who, owing to the Constitution, has the right to report and speak freely -- being uncomfortable with a fellow American's allegiance to the Constitution and to the Founding Fathers' vision of a limited central government.I fear we as a nation have drifted too far away from an understanding and appreciation of the greatest governance document the world has ever produced. We have a president today who usurps power never given to him in the Constitution, a dysfunctional Congress so gridlocked that it can't fulfill its mission as a separate-but-equal branch of government, and a Fourth Estate of media elites who cheerlead for a bigger, more intrusive government that unnecessarily addicts those struggling to escape poverty to handouts, rather than encouraging self-reliance.Let me be clear. Rightly sized and empowered, government serves an excellent purpose. Our Founding Fathers knew that and created a perfect vision for a republic of independent states protected and served by a central federal government with strong checks and balances. Those checks on powers were essential to the Framers, who established three equal but separate branches to ensure we always had a government \"of the people, for the people and by the people,\" as Abraham Lincoln so wisely said.But today we have people who are simply overgoverned -- subjected to taxation, regulation and intrusions by a massive federal government that our Founding Fathers never would have tolerated. It wants to control what we eat, how we live and even how much we can earn. It values political correctness over freedom, codependence over self-reliance, and redistribution of wealth over personal success.That's why I said what I did that Sunday morning to that talk-show host. I told him I would love to have a government again that places the Constitution at the center of its mission, that recognizes government was never intended to intrude on every aspect of our lives. Everywhere I go in this great nation these days, I hear that same plea, from farmers in rural communities fearful the next federal regulation will put their generations-old family farm out of business, to shopkeepers suffocating under an unnecessarily high tax burden, to young people seemingly reconciled that their government will monitor, record and track their every movement.The video evoked a visceral response in almost everyone, present company included. To brutally attack someone you supposedly love with enough force to threaten her life is very abnormal behavior. If the perpetrator is simply punished and the behavior not addressed, it is likely to manifest again, perhaps with even more serious consequences. Of course punishment for this heinous act is warranted. But where would any of us be if, after we committed some terrible act, everyone just piled on and no one sought to help us?Having been the transgressor as a teenager and almost stabbing someone, and subsequently by the grace of God learning how to look at things differently and resolve conflict without violence, I came to understand rage, consequences, penalties and redemption. Perhaps we should all take a step back from our pedestals of righteousness and let rational thought processes have a place in our lives. The point is, let's not get into useless discussions of whether Rice's punishment is not severe enough or too severe, because that is probably pointless. Instead, let's get help for these people and engage in useful dialogue about the horrors of domestic violence. Then, hopefully, we can use this as a teachable moment.Undoubtedly, those on the left will say Rice's abominable actions are being defended by Ben Carson, who thinks domestic violence is not so bad. This is nothing more than the usual superficial, desperate attempts to diminish someone they are worried about and for whom they have no good arguments. I would happily engage in a public debate with any of my left-wing critics on the issue of domestic violence, punishment and rehabilitation. We might even be able to reach some common ground and make progress if we stop using every opportunity to stoke the fires of hypersensitivity and division in our society. To even suggest that an intelligent person would defend the actions of Rice or blame his fiancee for the crime is beyond ludicrous. However, if there were not an appetite for such idiocy, it wouldn't exist.There are some who will say that Rice was defending himself from his fiancee, who was attacking him. He is so much bigger and stronger than she is that he easily could have restrained her without striking her. There is no excuse for pummeling anyone, much less a smaller, weaker individual. Many have been quick to jump to the conclusion that his fiancee, who is now his wife, was only in the relationship for the money, and there is no possibility that love enters the equation. This may or may not be the case, but it is a private matter for the Rice family to resolve on their own. Hopefully, that resolution will involve much-needed counseling to uncover the root causes of their problems. If they can go on to lead successful and happy lives even without the NFL, they will have achieved a good outcome.I normally encourage conversation and compromise where possible, but how does one negotiate or compromise with someone who desires your elimination? Maybe if you meet some of their demands, they will only dismember you or kill you more slowly. Obviously, the expansion of groups like the Islamic State represents an existential threat to our own nation and our way of life. If ever there was a time to work together for self-preservation, it is now. There really is no time to squabble about who was right and who was wrong regarding our activities in the Middle East. Our enemies will use every opportunity to divide us and distract us, which will make their job of destroying us much easier.In order to prevail in the war on terror, we must have an overall strategy, the goal of which is annihilation of the terrorists, as opposed to simply winning battles with them here and there. This means paying much more attention to military preparedness, both offensive and defensive. That means significantly increasing our covert operations, without blabbing to the world about what we will or will not do. It means cultivating strong and trusting relationships with our allies and never leaving them to worry about abandonment for political reasons. It means helping other countries in the region to realize that they, too, will soon be targets of the Islamic State, which will radically alter their comfortable lives.When it comes to the elimination of those trying to destroy us, we have to be smart enough to realize that we must have airtight borders to prevent easy access for terrorists. Some say this is too difficult. I guarantee that it is easier than trying to rebuild a nation that has been destroyed because we thought logical defense was too hard. There is no question that unpleasantries brought about by our own forces will be necessary to accomplish our goals and defeat terrorism, but you cannot win a politically correct war.Our enemies' desire to establish a caliphate is no joke. Their convert-or-die doctrine parallels some of the social philosophies enforced by the political-correctness police in this country. Either you accept their interpretation of what is moral and correct, or the name calling starts, and they attempt to destroy your business or reputation. Perhaps it would be useful to examine the tragedy with the facts on the table rather than through the lenses of hypersensitized emotions stimulated by those attempting to exploit the situation. Michael Brown was 6-foot-4 and 290 pounds. He had marijuana in his system and was purportedly involved in a strong-arm robbery prior to the shooting. He and a companion were walking in the middle of the street and obstructing traffic and therefore were admonished by a police officer to move to the sidewalk. Brown, who may have been pharmacologically impaired, became belligerent, and the ensuing struggle produced facial trauma and an orbital fracture of the police officer's face. The officer, who may have been dazed by a blow to the cranium severe enough to produce a fracture, attempted to apprehend the assailant, and shots were fired, six of which struck the suspect, resulting in a fatality.Regardless of one's position on the political spectrum, we can all agree that this was a horrible tragedy and needless discarding of a precious life. How could this have been avoided? Two obvious answers: The officer could have ignored his duty and backed off when it became apparent that his instructions would not be followed, thereby avoiding a confrontation, or Brown could have complied with the officer's instructions, according to his civic duties.If police officers generally adopted the first solution, chaos would reign supreme in all of our streets. If the populace generally adopted the second solution, there would be even fewer incidents of police violence. Last year, 100 black males were killed by police in the United States. In the same year, 5,000 blacks were killed by other blacks, the vast majority being males. Could it be that we are erroneously being manipulated into making this incident a racial issue, when, in fact, it is a component of a much larger social issue?Many people in this country were shocked when the U.S. Navy recently announced the removal of all Bibles from military hotels under their control. This was in response to pressure from the Freedom From Religion Foundation, a well-known atheist group.        The surprise is not the hypocritical stance of the Freedom From Religion Foundation, but rather the fact that an established bulwark of American strength and patriotism caved to a self-serving group of religious fanatics. The previous sentence may seem out of place if you don't realize that atheism is actually a religion.        Like traditional religions, atheism requires strong conviction. In the case of atheists, it's the belief that there is no God and that all things can be proved by science. It is extremely hypocritical of the foundation to request the removal of Bibles from hotel rooms on the basis of their contention that the presence of Bibles indicates that the government is choosing one religion over another. If they really thought about it, they would realize that removal of religious materials imposes their religion on everyone else.        Some atheists argue that there should be a library or cachet of religious material at the check-in desk of a hotel from which any guest could order a Bible, Torah or Koran for their reading pleasure. No favoritism would be shown through such a system, and those who reject the idea of God would not have to be offended.        This is like saying there shouldn't be certain brands of bottled water in hotel rooms because there may be guests who prefer a different type of water or are offended by bottled water and think everybody should be drinking tap water. The logical answer to such absurdity would, of course, be that the offended individual could bring his own water or simply ignore the brand of water he does not care for.        As a nation, we must avoid the paralysis of hypersensitivity, which prevents us from getting anything done because virtually everything offends someone. We need to distribute \"big boy\" pants to help the whiners learn to focus their energy in a productive way. We must also go back and read the Constitution, including the First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of religion. It says nothing about freedom from religion, and in fact, if you consider the context and the lives of those involved in the crafting of our founding documents, it is apparent that they believed in allowing their faith to guide their lives. This has nothing to do with imposing one's beliefs on someone else.\r\n\t A few weeks ago, it was quite revealing -- but not surprising -- to hear Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew imply that corporate America should willingly pay the highest corporate-tax rates in the world as part of its \"patriotic\" duty. This kind of discourse demonstrates a profound misunderstanding of capitalism, which is an important component of American exceptionalism.\r\n\r\n\t  In our system, people do not go into business, in many cases risking everything they have and more, in order to support the government. They obviously take those kinds of risks to make money. Instead of chastising American businesses for making financially prudent overseas investments, a wise and understanding government would be creating a domestic environment that is conducive to investment, innovation and growth, reducing the appeal of foreign explorations. A fair tax structure and a reduction in unnecessary regulations would go a long way toward establishing this environment.\r\n\r\n\t  Recently, President Obama indicated displeasure with the large and very successful medical-device company Medtronic, which has made public plans to acquire the Dublin-based company Covidien. This would result in one of the largest tax-inversion deals in history. Medtronic would move its headquarters from Minnesota to Ireland, relinquishing some of its American identity but reaping massive tax benefits because they would be taxed at the Irish corporate rate rather than the American corporate rate.\r\n\r\n\t  In a recent West Coast speech, Obama said companies doing such things are \"technically renouncing their U.S. citizenship.\" He added, referring to such companies, \"You don't get to pick which tax rate you pay.\" The fact is, they do get to pick their rate, because they are mobile and not yet under the complete control of a tyrannical government.\r\n\r\n\t  The days of an insular business environment are long gone from America, and we must recognize that we are players on the global stage. This means successful businesses will take advantage of conditions anywhere in the world that will promote their growth and value to shareholders. Instead of patriotism being defined as unthinking devotion to governmental tax edicts, perhaps it is better described as using one's talents and resources to bring strength and prosperity to our land through the successful utilization of advantages found worldwide. Our tax and regulatory policies should be aimed at helping companies achieve this latter definition.\r\n\r\n\tIntolerance that fosters pogroms abroad is taking root in U.S. communities. Sobering and unforgettable images are projected across our television and computer screens. They should elicit the most basic instincts of both fear and compassion.\r\n\n\r\n\tI'm referring to images of showing the persecution of hundreds of thousands, perhaps even millions, of our fellow brothers and sisters by incomprehensible religious zealots. Their intolerance of Christianity is beyond horrible. People are beheaded for their faith. Women and young girls are sexually violated, and whole families are wantonly slaughtered in cold blood. Perhaps just as abhorrent is the profound silence of the current administration. Even though President Obama has declared that we are not a Judeo-Christian nation, we are still compassionate people who should not ignore humanitarian atrocities, much less ones where the victims are only guilty of maintaining a belief in the principles espoused by Jesus Christ.\r\n\r\n\tWe have an obligation as Americans to denounce these acts of persecution. Even those who do not worship a higher deity should be concerned. For when we stand up to such intolerance, we are defending the root of freedom. We are defending choice -- the ability to worship and call on the name of a heavenly being without fear of torture and abandonment.\r\n\r\n\tThe president, who very early in his tenure won the Nobel Peace Prize, now has an opportunity to truly be the broker of peace in a very troubled part of the world. He can be a champion of freedom of religion, a founding principle of our nation. As long as religious practices do not infringe upon the rights of others, he can make it clear that it is wrong to interfere with those practices.\r\n\r\n\tIn our own country, we must become more reasonable in disputes about religious symbols. For instance, if a Christmas tree or manger scene has been a long-standing community tradition, and a few offended people come along and claim that it must be removed, should those few individuals have the power to interfere with the seasonal joy of thousands who rejoice in the viewing of those symbols? If someone is offended by a menorah in a Jewish community, would it not make more sense to give them sensitivity training rather than disturb the entire community by removing the symbol? I could go on, but I think the point is clear. When we reward unwarranted hypersensitivity surrounding religious ceremonies or beliefs, we add fuel to the hatred and intolerance that subsequently produces religious persecution.\r\n\n\r\n\tThe clear foreign policy that is grounded in American ideas of promoting liberty abroad and preserving our security at home is what is needed now. That is how we became a superpower. Reversing these ideas allows our adversaries to become stronger and impairs our ability to respond to present-day threats.\r\n\r\n\tWhile Obama's foreign-policy adventures have waxed and waned in the eyes of the American public, his indecisiveness in places such as Iraq and Syria has presented an image of weakness on the global stage.\r\n\r\n\tWe have failed to adequately deal with Russian aggression in Georgia and Ukraine. Recognizing that the United States would soon be changing administrations, Russia invaded Georgia in 2008. As a nation, we stood by and watched during that transition, as parts of Georgia fell under Russian rule. Vladimir Putin sensed our weakness and saw opportunity. Six years later, he annexed Crimea, and now pro-Russian forces are trying to take over more land in Ukraine.\r\n\r\n\tWhat has the Obama administration done in response to this aggression by Russia? Not really much, other than impose toothless sanctions on Russian businessmen close to Putin (but not the Russian president himself), which have done little to make Russia change course. Is this what Ronald Reagan would have done? Or would he have helped pro-democracy Ukrainians and pressed Europe to look for alternatives to Russian natural gas to preclude being held hostage by Russian energy? Additionally, we need to reinforce our commitments to NATO and get the former components of the Soviet Union involved. Otherwise, Putin will do this again. We need to embolden Europe to confront him.\r\n\r\n\tRussia is not the only country that has taken advantage of our preoccupation with the Middle East. Recently, China has been expanding its maritime boundary in the South China Sea. It also seeks to test our resolve to long-held security commitments we have with our partners in Asia. We must do more to let our Asian allies know that we will stand with them and confront China's territorial ambitions. China continues to threaten our country with cyber-attacks and is a repressive global power. We need to do more to support those people in China who long for democratic reform.\r\n\n\r\n\tThe power of the purse, particularly in a capitalistic society, is mighty, and business boycotts are a potent tool in the hands of the masses to enforce economic and social fairness. Through the use of the ballot and the wallet, we the people have life-or-death power over virtually every aspect of our nation.\r\n\r\n\tAstute business people generally do not make their political views widely known, because they realize that about half of their customers agree with them and half do not. There is no need to unnecessarily create animosity, especially when you are trying to sell products. In the case of Costco, a company highly respected for wise business practices, Jim Sinegal, the co-founder and former CEO, has made no secret of his profound admiration for President Obama and his policies.\r\n\r\n\tFor the sake of disclosure, I should reveal that I have been a member of the Costco board of directors for 15 years. There are people on the board of several political persuasions, and we are all friendly and work well together because politics plays no role in business decisions. In the years that I have had the privilege of serving on the board, I have never witnessed a single incident where politics influenced a business decision. Not only would that be unwise, but it would lead to mass resignations and membership cancellations, including yours truly.\r\n\r\n\tBecause of Sinegal's public support of Obama, the recent withdrawal of Dinesh D'Souza's book \"America: Imagine a World Without Her\" from Costco warehouses nationwide, just before the release of the movie by the same title, was widely interpreted as a political move -- the movie is very critical of the president. I spoke to current Costco CEO Craig Jelinek, who was so absorbed in the business of the company that he had been unaware of the movie prior to the resultant backlash. He readily admitted that those responsible for managing the limited book space in Costco warehouses should have been aware of the imminent release of the movie and retained the book in anticipation of a brisk stimulation of book sales, which had been sluggish.\r\n\n\r\n\tI was struck by the way many people perceived the political atmosphere in the United States. Although the well-educated individuals who have access to all of the American cable channels tend to be well informed on the issues, most people had only heard that America has finally repaired its broken medical system with the advent of Obamacare and now everyone, including the indigent, has excellent health care. They were under the impression that most Americans are very happy with Obamacare and with their wonderful president, who had ushered in a great new day in America with his brilliance in many areas.\r\n\r\n\tMany people were shocked when I relayed the facts about the deleterious effects of Obamacare on employment, skyrocketing insurance premiums and the displacement of health care providers. Furthermore, they had little knowledge about Benghazi, the Internal Revenue Service scandal, the Veterans Affairs debacle or the depth of our financial woes. In other words, they were just like a multitude of Americans who pay little attention to their news sources and are not curious enough to seek multiple sources and arm themselves with enough historical knowledge to be able to decipher truth from fiction.\r\n\r\n\tFortunately, I found that most of the people Down Under are not nearly as dogmatic in their beliefs as Americans have become. Our people on either side of the political spectrum tend to be more close-minded, partaking only of news sources that align with their ideological beliefs and in many cases engaging in the demonization of other information sources. This, of course, leads to intolerance and ignorance, which are associated with a whole cadre of societal problems. Frequently, that narrow-mindedness is encouraged by hyper-partisan individuals who actually call out news outlets such as the Fox News Channel for ridicule.\r\n\r\n\tSuch people might do well to ask themselves what would become of our country if people only heard what the government wanted them to hear. If they could be honest with themselves, I think they would have to admit that they would be uncomfortable in that setting. The mainstream media could provide a great service to the American people, as well as people around the world, by embracing their duty to be objective investigators and reporters of the news. I realize the likelihood of that occurring is small, but hope springs eternal.\r\nIt's fortunate the Supreme Court of the United States saw it fit last week to rule that corporations could not be coerced into covering religiously objectionable forms of birth control for their employees.\r\n\r\n\tThis was a critical ruling, because it indicates that the majority of the Court still thinks religious beliefs and personal choice have a valid place in American society. The margin of the split decision, however, is alarming, because it reminds us of how close we are to having a government that will subject moral convictions to its bureaucratically directed control.\r\n\r\n\tPeople have legitimate differences of opinion about the appropriateness of various forms of birth control, which is something most reasonable people on both sides of the political ledger understand. However, legally requiring the side opposed to a form of birth control to be financially responsible for its distribution to any employee who wants it is distinctly un-American and abusive to the concept of freedom of religion.\r\n\r\n\tA major problem is that many people in our entitlement society see nothing wrong with forcing others to provide for their desires. In a free and open society, anyone should be able to purchase anything he or she wants that is legal. It really should be no one else's business. Common sense dictates, however, that it immediately becomes my business if I'm being forced to pay for it.\r\n\r\n\tWouldn't it be fairer and make more sense for people wanting some form of birth control to pay for it themselves? This is exactly what would happen if everyone had access to his or her own health savings account. A woman and her health care provider would decide on a birth control method, and the cost would be deducted from her account with no involvement of anyone else in any way. It's so simple and upholds privacy and freedom.\r\n\r\n\tHealth savings accounts can be funded in a variety of different ways and give people total control of where, how and with whom they wish to spend their health care dollars. Most people will want to get the biggest bang for the buck and will independently seek out both value and quality. That, in turn, will bring all aspects of medicine into the free-market economic model, thus automatically having an ameliorating effect on pricing transparency and quality of outcomes.\r\nHouse Speaker John Boehner recently shocked many of us when he announced that he is planning a lawsuit against the president for abuse of power. Many Americans feel that a harmonious working relationship between the branches of government has been seriously compromised in recent years. But when Alexis de Tocqueville visited America in 1831 to perform an in-depth analysis of the American phenomenon, he was impressed with our well-structured divided government and its separation of powers.\r\n\r\n\r\n\tThe writings of the founders of this nation certainly referenced the Bible frequently, but they also paid homage to the writings of Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu, who wrote prolifically about political theories. One of his most well-known works is \"The Spirit of the Laws.\" In this book, he eloquently argues for the concept of separation of powers.\r\n\r\n\tThat argument seems to emanate from the Bible's book of Isaiah, 33:22, which states, \"The Lord is our judge (judicial branch), the Lord is our lawgiver (legislative branch), the Lord is our King (executive branch).\" Certainly this system of government has worked well for us in the past, helping to establish the United States of America as the most powerful nation the world has ever known within a relatively short period of time.\r\n\r\n\tIn order for a divided government to work, each branch must respect the other two branches. There always have been and always will be squabbles between the branches, but the big problem now is that the executive branch has decided to ignore anyone with whom it disagrees, including Congress.\r\n\r\n\tNowhere was this blatant disregard of Congress more clearly manifested than in President Obama's inappropriate \"recess\" appointments of three people to the National Labor Relations Board. He redefined the word \"recess\" in order to appoint individuals who might have a difficult time obtaining congressional approval.\r\n\r\n\tThis administration seems to have a penchant for redefining words to make them conform to its ideology. Obviously, if an individual can redefine anything anytime he wants to, he can manipulate virtually any situation into a favorable position for himself. If he is clever and no one notices, he can fundamentally change the foundational fabric of a society.\r\nThe audacity of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in canceling the trademark of the Washington Redskins is frightening. When the government is in charge of deciding what is offensive and what is not, and has the power to punish the \"offenders,\" we move further away from a free society and closer to a tyrannical nanny state.\r\n\r\n\tWe are not talking about a political issue that should have Democrats and Republicans coming down on different sides, but rather the fundamental freedom to express oneself, which is a part of the fabric of America. In the case of Dan Snyder, who owns the Redskins, he is being demonized for standing up for basic American principles. The team bore the same name when he purchased it in good faith. There was no indication at the time that subsequent demands for a name change would emerge, costing him millions of dollars in related expenses, not to mention lawsuits he might encounter by other businesses that could be injured by such a move.\r\n\r\n\tThere is no indication that many in the Native American community are upset after decades of the team's prominent and proud display of its mascot and name. This appears to be yet another case of purposefully induced hypersensitivity, providing yet another opportunity for unnecessary heavy-handed government tactics to infringe upon the peaceful existence of Americans.\r\n\r\n\tI have had the pleasure of meeting Snyder, who is far from the demonic characterization seen in the gullible press, which allows itself to be manipulated by those wishing to bring about fundamental change in America. I do not doubt for one minute that the Redskins organization would change the name tomorrow if it thought it was truly offensive to most Native Americans.\r\n\r\n\tAlso, the majority of American citizens are still decent people who would not only demand a name change, but would vote with their feet and purses in a way that would send a loud and convincing message -- if they thought the name was offensive.\r\n\r\n\tIt appears that many have forgotten the power of free-market economic forces and instead have placed their trust in flawed government forces. Historically, individual freedoms vanish as government interventions increase.\r\n\n\r\n\tOne would not have to be incredibly bright to predict that families in South and Central America, as well as in Mexico, would recognize a veiled invitation to get their children into the United States with little chance of deportation. Of course, the media are asking opponents of the administration for solutions to this crisis. Almost anything these opponents suggest will be either harsh, making them appear cruel and callous, or weak, making them appear to be amnesty supporters. Either way, they will take a political hit.\r\n\r\n\tMeanwhile, the administration can stay above the fray and receive the political benefit of gratitude from many legal and illegal immigrants. It's a clever and effective ploy with the added benefit of redistributing even more American wealth. It remains to be seen how many people will be hoodwinked.\r\n\r\n\tWe all have heard it said many times that America is a land of immigrants, some voluntary and some involuntary. We have plenty of space in our country, but insufficient jobs and insufficient resources to support everyone who wants to come here. When we see innocent children used as political pawns, it still tugs at our heartstrings, which is the intent. The real question is: What are we going to do about it?\r\n\r\n\tThe combination of immigration reform being a tough issue and a political football has led to governmental stalemates and no useful solutions for decades. To begin to solve this problem, we must have some understanding of why it exists.\r\n\r\n\tDespite all of its problems, America is still the place of dreams. As such, it is small wonder that so many from other nations would like to live here. The benefits of an American domicile are so great that they currently outweigh issues of legality.\r\n\r\n        There is no question that a free, honest and unbiased press is a great asset to any free and fair society. A press characterized by integrity demands answers to hard questions from everyone, regardless of political affiliation. When the media choose sides, it enables those on the selected side to ignore rules and conduct themselves as they please, having no one to whom they must answer. Of course, this assumes the populace is largely asleep at the wheel and not demanding objectivity of the press.\r\n        Unfortunately, the \"mainstream media\" and the American people have conformed to this latter description in recent years, but I see signs of the people beginning to recognize the risks to both political and economic freedom imposed by the continuation of a journey down that pathway. Like politicians, the media no longer enjoy the almost unanimous trust they once could take for granted. What has caused so much of the media to become biased and agenda-driven, and why has the partiality become so blatant?\r\n        I think the answer revolves around the fact that we as a nation are at a critical decision point. We are one or two national elections away from determining whether we want to continue down the road toward \"utopia,\" where all of our basic needs are met from cradle to grave, the only price being total subservience to the government, or alternatively, to reverse direction and go back up the road toward personal responsibility and embrace the \"can-do\" attitude and values that facilitated the rapid rise of America on the world stage.\r\n        The proponents of each of these lifestyles are convinced that they are right, and it will be difficult to convince them otherwise. Because many so-called \"progressives\" reject the traditional American way of life and wish to fundamentally change us, I think they have an obligation to fully engage in the debate about why their vision is better. Many of these liberals dwell in the mainstream media and seem reluctant to engage in serious conversation. Instead, they attempt to ask leading questions of their opponents and then distort the answers in an attempt to diminish their \"enemy\" in the eyes of the public. If they are successful, they never have to actually address the real issue for which they have no real answers.\r\n        It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.\r\n        \r\n        Unfortunately, the \"mainstream media\" and the American people have conformed to this latter description in recent years, but I see signs of the people beginning to recognize the risks to both political and economic freedom imposed by the continuation of a journey down that pathway. Like politicians, the media no longer enjoy the almost unanimous trust they once could take for granted. What has caused so much of the media to become biased and agenda-driven, and why has the partiality become so blatant?\r\n        I think the answer revolves around the fact that we as a nation are at a critical decision point. We are one or two national elections away from determining whether we want to continue down the road toward \"utopia,\" where all of our basic needs are met from cradle to grave, the only price being total subservience to the government, or alternatively, to reverse direction and go back up the road toward personal responsibility and embrace the \"can-do\" attitude and values that facilitated the rapid rise of America on the world stage.\r\n        The proponents of each of these lifestyles are convinced that they are right, and it will be difficult to convince them otherwise. Because many so-called \"progressives\" reject the traditional American way of life and wish to fundamentally change us, I think they have an obligation to fully engage in the debate about why their vision is better. Many of these liberals dwell in the mainstream media and seem reluctant to engage in serious conversation. Instead, they attempt to ask leading questions of their opponents and then distort the answers in an attempt to diminish their \"enemy\" in the eyes of the public. If they are successful, they never have to actually address the real issue for which they have no real answers.\r\n        It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.\r\n        \r\n        I think the answer revolves around the fact that we as a nation are at a critical decision point. We are one or two national elections away from determining whether we want to continue down the road toward \"utopia,\" where all of our basic needs are met from cradle to grave, the only price being total subservience to the government, or alternatively, to reverse direction and go back up the road toward personal responsibility and embrace the \"can-do\" attitude and values that facilitated the rapid rise of America on the world stage.\r\n        The proponents of each of these lifestyles are convinced that they are right, and it will be difficult to convince them otherwise. Because many so-called \"progressives\" reject the traditional American way of life and wish to fundamentally change us, I think they have an obligation to fully engage in the debate about why their vision is better. Many of these liberals dwell in the mainstream media and seem reluctant to engage in serious conversation. Instead, they attempt to ask leading questions of their opponents and then distort the answers in an attempt to diminish their \"enemy\" in the eyes of the public. If they are successful, they never have to actually address the real issue for which they have no real answers.\r\n        It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.\r\n        \r\n        The proponents of each of these lifestyles are convinced that they are right, and it will be difficult to convince them otherwise. Because many so-called \"progressives\" reject the traditional American way of life and wish to fundamentally change us, I think they have an obligation to fully engage in the debate about why their vision is better. Many of these liberals dwell in the mainstream media and seem reluctant to engage in serious conversation. Instead, they attempt to ask leading questions of their opponents and then distort the answers in an attempt to diminish their \"enemy\" in the eyes of the public. If they are successful, they never have to actually address the real issue for which they have no real answers.\r\n        It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.\r\n        \r\n        It is encouraging that many people are seeing the light and ignoring the intellectually bankrupt assertions of these agents of resentment. We should teach our children and everyone in our spheres of influence to recognize these disgusting and dishonest techniques and reject them. As was the case on the third-grade playground in elementary school, it is best to ignore the name-callers and proceed with more important endeavors.\r\n        \n\r\n\tWe wrote \"One Nation\" to convince our fellow Americans that \"we the people\" are not enemies and that our strength is derived from unity and common sense, which should be ubiquitous. The real enemies are the forces that are constantly trying to divide and conquer. They create divisions based on race, gender, age, education and, especially, income. It is important that we discuss who the purveyors of division are and what drives them to seek a radical alteration of the American way of life.\r\n\r\n\tWe discuss the tools used to manipulate the populace into feeling that they should be offended so easily by words, while diverting their attention away from the real issues that desperately cry out for a solution. One of the major keys to avoiding manipulation is knowledge. Our system of government was designed for people who could easily understand the issues and vote intelligently based on knowledge, rather than blindly following political leaders who are often enshrouded with less than honorable motives.\r\n\r\n\tOne of the book's major themes is that knowledge is a formidable enemy of falsehood and a formidable ally of truth. There are specific steps that each of us can take, such as reading about something new for a half-hour every day for a year. Such a simple move will profoundly change the life of the reader and will vastly increase their effectiveness as an involved and responsible citizen.\r\n\r\n\tIn today's world of widely disseminated information, a person rapidly can become knowledgeable in a variety of areas, regardless of his occupation.\r\n\r\n\tThe greatest concerns of the people we are encountering on the road revolve around the future of their children and grandchildren as we continue along the path of government growth and escalating expenditure of taxpayer money, essentially ensuring that future generations have lives characterized by significantly reduced economic freedom.\r\n\n\r\n\tVoting for someone who agrees with you 90 percent of the time is far superior to voting for someone who disagrees with you 100 percent of the time. This is exactly what will happen if people refuse to exercise their civic duty and boycott elections because they feel betrayed. Personally, I am not supportive of abortion at all, but I can support people who feel differently if, in the gigantic scheme of things, they can help put an end to the murder of innocent babies. This is especially true of those who are personally inclined to save and protect life.\r\n\r\n\tPerhaps an illustration is in order: Two armies are engaged in a war. Let's call the good army that is trying to defend an entire society the red army and the bad army that is trying to invade and pillage society the blue army. The blue army occupies a superior strategic position and is composed of slightly more troops, putting the red army at a distinct disadvantage. Some in the red army feel that they are right and, therefore, should simply march directly into battle with the blue army because right always wins.\r\n\r\n\tFortunately, some members of the red army are wise and have a better plan. They send a battalion of troops to the base of the mountain occupied by the blue army to distract them while the vast majority of red troops approach the mountain from the backside. They descend upon the blue army by surprise, completely vanquishing them and winning the war. The decoy red battalion may have sustained some casualties, but in the long run, the war was won, and the entire society was saved.\r\n\r\n\r\n        I recently was asked how I could possibly endorse the U.S. Senate candidacy of Dr. Monica Wehby, who is running as a Republican from Oregon. She is pro-choice, which in the opinion of many makes her unacceptable as a conservative.\r\n        I called her to query her about her stance on this issue. She stated that personally, she is very pro-life, but she feels the government has no business interfering with the relationship between the mother, the baby, the doctor and God. I feel differently, because if abolitionists had taken a similar hands-off approach, I might not have been free to write this column. As someone who has spent a lifetime trying to save the lives of children, even with intrauterine surgery, it is probably not difficult to imagine why I am extremely oriented toward efforts to preserve human life, especially innocent human life that has yet to experience the extrauterine world.\r\n        Given this pro-life propensity, one might ask how I could endorse someone who is pro-choice. The answer is this: I'm not an ideologue who determines a person's worthiness with a litmus test. I have known Wehby as a friend and colleague for many years, and she is extremely intelligent and knows how to make decisions based on evidence versus ideology. Also, in a state like Oregon, which is left-leaning, she would not be a viable candidate if she maintained a pro-life stance.\r\n        If conservatives are going to win in 2014 and 2016 and preserve the environment of freedom to which we have grown accustomed, it will be necessary to learn how to prioritize issues. I am not saying that social issues are not important, but if the executive branch remains in the hands of those with \"secular progressive\" ideas in 2016, and two or three more Supreme Court justices with similar leanings are appointed, conservative social ideas will become anathema to the prevailing powers, who will use every tool available to them to silence such opposition.\r\n        The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square in recent years. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or assassinate their character.\r\n        \r\n        I called her to query her about her stance on this issue. She stated that personally, she is very pro-life, but she feels the government has no business interfering with the relationship between the mother, the baby, the doctor and God. I feel differently, because if abolitionists had taken a similar hands-off approach, I might not have been free to write this column. As someone who has spent a lifetime trying to save the lives of children, even with intrauterine surgery, it is probably not difficult to imagine why I am extremely oriented toward efforts to preserve human life, especially innocent human life that has yet to experience the extrauterine world.\r\n        Given this pro-life propensity, one might ask how I could endorse someone who is pro-choice. The answer is this: I'm not an ideologue who determines a person's worthiness with a litmus test. I have known Wehby as a friend and colleague for many years, and she is extremely intelligent and knows how to make decisions based on evidence versus ideology. Also, in a state like Oregon, which is left-leaning, she would not be a viable candidate if she maintained a pro-life stance.\r\n        If conservatives are going to win in 2014 and 2016 and preserve the environment of freedom to which we have grown accustomed, it will be necessary to learn how to prioritize issues. I am not saying that social issues are not important, but if the executive branch remains in the hands of those with \"secular progressive\" ideas in 2016, and two or three more Supreme Court justices with similar leanings are appointed, conservative social ideas will become anathema to the prevailing powers, who will use every tool available to them to silence such opposition.\r\n        The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square in recent years. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or assassinate their character.\r\n        \r\n        Given this pro-life propensity, one might ask how I could endorse someone who is pro-choice. The answer is this: I'm not an ideologue who determines a person's worthiness with a litmus test. I have known Wehby as a friend and colleague for many years, and she is extremely intelligent and knows how to make decisions based on evidence versus ideology. Also, in a state like Oregon, which is left-leaning, she would not be a viable candidate if she maintained a pro-life stance.\r\n        If conservatives are going to win in 2014 and 2016 and preserve the environment of freedom to which we have grown accustomed, it will be necessary to learn how to prioritize issues. I am not saying that social issues are not important, but if the executive branch remains in the hands of those with \"secular progressive\" ideas in 2016, and two or three more Supreme Court justices with similar leanings are appointed, conservative social ideas will become anathema to the prevailing powers, who will use every tool available to them to silence such opposition.\r\n        The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square in recent years. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or assassinate their character.\r\n        \r\n        If conservatives are going to win in 2014 and 2016 and preserve the environment of freedom to which we have grown accustomed, it will be necessary to learn how to prioritize issues. I am not saying that social issues are not important, but if the executive branch remains in the hands of those with \"secular progressive\" ideas in 2016, and two or three more Supreme Court justices with similar leanings are appointed, conservative social ideas will become anathema to the prevailing powers, who will use every tool available to them to silence such opposition.\r\n        The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square in recent years. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or assassinate their character.\r\n        \r\n        The extreme intolerance of the left for opinions that vary from their own has been amply demonstrated on university campuses, in the mainstream media and in the public square in recent years. Boycotting those with whom they disagree is insufficient for them, as demonstrated by their attempts to put their political adversaries out of business or assassinate their character.\r\n        The recent escalating arguments over whether there should be further congressional hearings on Benghazi are troubling. The fact that there are substantial numbers of people who feel that there is nothing more to investigate when four American lives were lost and no one has answered for this crime provides an indication of how far our sense of justice has slipped.\r\n\r\n\tThis should not be a partisan issue, because the implications of ignoring or prevaricating about the underlying mistakes will have far-reaching consequences. The United States has diplomatic establishments throughout the world, and if they can be attacked without consequences, it greatly diminishes our influence despite any protestations to the contrary.\r\n\r\n\tWhat does it say about our judgment if we have diplomatic establishments for which we make inadequate provisions for protection? This is especially disturbing because it was revealed that requests by the consulate in Benghazi for more protection were refused. There had been attacks on the consulate not long before the fatal attack, and hostile actions had been taken against the British, which they were wise enough to react to appropriately.\r\n\r\n\tEven more confounding was the decision to abandon our personnel at the consulate because someone decided that our military forces could not reach them in time to effect a rescue. How could such a decision be made when no one knew how long the hostile action would last? Several military personnel who were in the area ignored orders to stand down and instead rushed to the consulate with assault weapons and resisted hostile forces long enough to allow some of their colleagues to escape, while sacrificing their own lives. Their heroic actions demonstrate the bravery and loyalty that characterize American military forces. I feel certain that those men had no doubt in their minds that reinforcements were on the way, and that if they could just hold out long enough, their efforts would be rewarded.\r\n\r\n\tWhen our top officials make decisions to abandon our own people because they feel the situation is hopeless, they also abandon the concept of American exceptionalism and create doubt in the minds of all future military participants about the intention of their superiors to expend maximum effort to preserve their lives when they have sacrificed everything for our nation.\r\n\n\r\n\tThere is no question that America is the pinnacle nation of the world and is likely to remain in that position for several years, given our military strength and the depth and stability of our financial infrastructure. However, overconfidence is the frequent companion of catastrophic decline, as confirmed by numerous historical writings. If we continue our fiscally irresponsible ways, coupled with our arrogance, there exists no other possibility than self-ruination.\r\n\r\n\tOur ability to print money is already in jeopardy, as other nations have been making noise about altering the international reserve-currency system to emphasize multiple currencies, elevating their status and decreasing the strength of the U.S. dollar. Our ever-increasing national debt would then place us on shaky ground. The Treasury securities we have been offering to China and others would no longer hold the same appeal, and all the borrowing we have done against the financial well-being of our progeny will come back to plague us and them.\r\n\r\n\tMany who are responsible for putting us in this precarious position would argue that we don't need to worry about countries such as China replacing us, because they have too many structural problems. China is far behind us in per-capita income, creating many social issues and negatively impacting growth of the middle class, which is the most effective growth engine.\r\n\r\n\tTheir paucity of appropriate environmental controls has led to lethal industrial pollution, encouraging some of the intellectually gifted and mobile citizens to leave the country. China also has a weak banking system, with too much government interference, which means their currency is unlikely to be accepted by the rest of the world as the reserve currency for many years. They could, however, recognize and correct these deficiencies more rapidly than expected, thereby enhancing their position as a formidable challenger to the United States.\r\nWith Europeans intrigued by America's unexpected success, Alexis de Tocqueville carried out an in-depth study of the new nation in the 1830s. He was quite impressed with our divided government, which featured the separation of powers.\r\n\r\n\tThis structure made it difficult for any one branch -- executive, judicial or legislative -- to acquire too much power and run roughshod over the other branches and the will of the American people. Unfortunately, today we are witnessing a largely unchecked executive branch issuing decrees that circumvent Congress while facing only tepid resistance.\r\n\r\n\tIn civilian life, when a contract is entered into by two parties, and it is subsequently discovered that one side knowingly presented false promises in order to consummate the deal, a legitimate lawsuit can be initiated on the basis of fraud. The Affordable Care Act is a prime example of such a contract in the form of a bill, which never would have been passed if it had been revealed that millions of people would lose the health insurance with which they were satisfied and that they might not be able to keep their doctors, among other promises.\r\n\r\n\tNevertheless, this massive case of fraud has not been legally challenged by the legislative branch, leaving one to wonder why.\r\n\r\n\tWe hear a great deal about \"Chicago-style politics.\" It is nothing more than a euphemism for political corruption, including bullying, blackmail and bribery. These pressures can be just as easily applied to national political figures as to local politicians.\r\n\r\n\tCourage can be quite difficult to find when the threat of exposure hangs over one's head. In an age when Big Brother is capable of watching everything we do, it is not hard to imagine a scenario in which large numbers of public servants are silenced or subdued by secretive threats.\r\n\r\n\tI have had an opportunity to witness firsthand how the blackmail threat operates. Several years ago, while I was in the operating room, I received a call from one of the legal offices at Johns Hopkins University informing me that the state of Florida was trying to attach my wages for child support.\r\n\r\n\tI was shocked at such an allegation and informed them that I have three children, which I already support very ably. They said a woman in Florida was accusing me of being the father of her son, and that she had proof of our relationship. The proof turned out to be knowledge of where I went to high school, college and medical school, and where I served my internship and residency. To top all of that off, she had a picture of me in scrubs. I said anyone could obtain such information. However, the paternity suit was pursued, and I had to involve my personal lawyer.\r\nThe Cliven Bundy case in Nevada provides many insights into the state of our nation with respect to the relationship between the people and the government.\r\n\r\n\tThe Bundys appear to be honorable American citizens without adequate legal counsel to help resolve a federal land issue about which they disagree with the Bureau of Land Management. Without question, they violated some of the innumerable laws and regulations that continue to entangle every aspect of American life.\r\n\r\n\tTheir violations certainly could have been handled through a multitude of less brutal means than those employed by our federal government, which through the mouthpiece of Sen. Harry Reid emphasizes how important it is for the government to enforce its laws.\r\n\r\n\tIt is quite interesting to see, though, that those same bureaucrats refuse to enforce some of our federal border-protection laws and other domestic policies with which they disagree. Perhaps Reid's time could be better spent explaining why it is acceptable for the federal government to pick and choose which laws it wishes to enforce.\r\n\r\n\tThe senator readily referred to the Bundys and their supporters as \"domestic terrorists,\" but the current administration is reticent about applying the same term to Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, who admitted slaughtering more than a dozen people in 2009 at Fort Hood in Texas. What does this tell us about our government and its perceptions and alignments?\r\n\r\n\tThe massive show of federal force in the Bundy case is frightening because it gives us a brief glimpse of the totalitarian regime that awaits a sleeping populace that does not take seriously its voting responsibilities and places in public office (and returns to public office) people who do not represent traditional American values.\r\n\r\n\tThe fact that the ranchers were well armed and willing to literally fight for their rights probably tempered the enthusiasm of the federal forces to engage in further aggression. It was clear from the body language and from some of the reported verbal responses of the government forces that they were not prepared to engage in lethal combat with fellow Americans.\r\n\r\n\tThose Americans who are concerned about the possible future imposition of martial law after a financial collapse or some other event should take solace in knowing that many military and law enforcement personnel would likely refuse to obey commands inconsistent with freedom and American values. Such commands could emanate from any political party in the future, but it is likely that such a party would be one controlling an administration that selectively enforces laws and ignores or excuses corruption.\r\nIn 1831, Alexis de Tocqueville, the famous French historian, came to America to study our nation. Europeans and others were fascinated with the success of the fledgling nation, then barely 50 years old and already competing on the world stage.\r\n\r\n\tSuch a thing had never before occurred, and Tocqueville was determined to discover the secret. He was duly impressed by our governmental structure, including the separation of powers, but he was in awe of the public educational system, which rendered its recipients completely literate by the completion of second grade. This depth of education was generally only found among the aristocracy in Europe.\r\n\r\n\tLet's put aside the diversionary arguments about lack of educational access for all, which was a huge mistake, and concentrate on the tremendous advantage afforded our predecessors by education. Early settlers not only mastered reading, writing and arithmetic, but also shared practical skills, all of which enabled them to traverse and tame a rugged and frequently hostile terrain from sea to shining sea.\r\n\r\n\tAs isolated communities sprang up throughout the nation, they were able to thrive through innovation, industry and compassion. The \"can-do\" attitude involved hard labor, but it also included a sense of responsibility for those who through injury or other hardships could no longer care for themselves. The spirit of caring, although diminished, remains an important part of who we are today.\r\n\r\n\tTocqueville was impressed by the fiery sermons that emphasized the word of God and not the social mores of the day. He concluded his American analysis by saying, \"America is great because she is good. If America ever ceases to be good, she will cease to be great.\" America was different because we openly acknowledged the role of God in our lives.\r\n\r\n\tSome will say, \"Carson is a religious fanatic because he believes in God and the Bible.\" Interestingly, the very same people are quick to invoke the name of God and recommend prayer at times of national and personal tragedy. Hypocrisy is their frequent companion.\r\n\r\n\tSome will say America can never make claims of \"goodness\" owing to her history of slavery. Although it was by far the worst atrocity in our history, we paid a horrendous price in lives lost or destroyed in a Civil War that all but incapacitated a young nation. The guilt, shame and humility that resulted from this dark American episode will teach us and stigmatize us well into the future. Learning from mistakes is a sign of wisdom and goodness.\r\nImagine a situation in which there is an earthquake that destroys a suspension bridge over a deep canyon.\r\n\r\n\tA passenger train is speeding toward the location, and those in charge realize there is a potential problem ahead but choose instead to argue about the ambient temperature in the passenger cars, the food service and whether they will reach their final destination on time. A few people are quite disturbed when they learn of the tragedy about to unfold if the train isn't halted, but they are labeled as \"alarmists\" who really are not sophisticated enough to understand the situation.\r\n\r\n\tObviously, I am referring to our nation and the impending disaster that awaits us if we continue on a course of ever-expanding government control of our lives, fiscal irresponsibility, unwise energy policies and a laissez-faire attitude regarding our world leadership responsibilities.\r\n\r\n\tConservatives and other thinking individuals must recognize that we are in dire straits. They must adopt a sense of urgency in order to prevent irreparable damage to the concept of a nation where people are free to pursue their dreams without interference -- as long as they are not harming others.\r\n\r\n\tThey should not be arguing among themselves over petty differences and refusing to support individuals who largely agree with them about the direction of the country but perhaps have some disagreements about issues that easily could be resolved after the disaster has been averted.\r\n\r\n\tIt is troubling to see members of the tea party being attacked by establishment conservatives, and vice versa. If they get angry when their candidate loses in a primary race and refuse to support the winner, they are playing right into the hands of the progressives, from whom they could learn much.\r\n\r\n\tCurrently, there are two major visions for America. Liberals envision an overarching central government that controls all of the resources and ensures \"equitable\" redistribution in a way that prevents anyone from suffering hardship, regardless of their lifestyle and life choices.\r\n\r\n\tThe conservative vision emphasizes personal responsibility and a governmental role confined by the U.S. Constitution. This is the vision that was embraced by our founders.\r\n\r\n\tThe liberal vision, however, seems to be rapidly gaining momentum, even though many of its proponents would argue that either the government is not really trying to take control, or authority is a necessary function in its role of determining qualifications for licenses, setting standards and establishing such things as age requirements for public school attendance.\r\nDivide and conquer is an age-old strategy, effectively used by many in positions of power to ensure that they retain their wealth and authority.\r\n\r\n\tDuring the dark days of slavery in America, there were many geographic areas where the number of slaves significantly surpassed the number of whites and slave owners. This occasioned appropriate anxiety for the owners, who cleverly sowed seeds of discord among the different groups of slaves in an attempt to effectively destroy unity. For example, field slaves were told that the house slaves thought of themselves as superior.\r\n\r\n\tThis worked in most cases, although there were notable instances of secret cooperation between the slaves to accomplish various goals. It required real wisdom and insight to avoid easy manipulation by the slave owners, who usually used slaves loyal to them to accomplish their nefarious objectives.\r\n\r\n\tIn today's culture, there are political forces that see the descendants of slaves as useful objects for maintaining their positions of wealth and power. By promising to care for their every need, they create dependency.\r\n\r\n\tFrightening those dependents into thinking they will be abandoned if others are in control, they create loyalty that is undeserved but fierce, loyalty that translates into the real goal: votes. Anything or anyone that threatens this paradigm of victim and protector must be destroyed, lest the victims recognize the deceitfulness of their manipulators and revolt.\r\n\r\n\tThe most dangerous people to the modern manipulators are people who have freed themselves from the plantation mentality. They eschew the propaganda of victimhood and advocate for personal responsibility. They see the value found in the true compassion of a hand up rather than a handout.\r\n\r\n\tThe tragedy is that many \"leaders\" of the black community succumb to the poison of the controlling elites, who make them feel \"cool\" and important. I'm sure that some actually realize what is happening, but -- like the kids you remember in high school -- they don't want to risk being ostracized and expelled from the \"in crowd\" and therefore remain silent.\r\n\r\n\tIt is so important for the black community to realize that there is tremendous strength in unity and that disagreement on some issues does not have to create animosity. In fact, by engaging in open discussions rather than demonizing, a great deal can be learned by all parties.\r\nWhile the media have been focused on the missing Malaysian aircraft, massive alterations of the world's geopolitical terrain are underway simultaneously.\r\n\r\n\tThe annexation of Crimea by Russia should not have been a surprise for anyone who suspects that President Vladimir Putin is trying to re-establish a powerful Soviet-style empire. When he aggressively attacked Georgia in 2008 after both Georgia and Ukraine failed to obtain NATO admission at the Bucharest Summit, we should have realized that his goals were not limited to one territory. I suspect he is now calculating an excuse to occupy the easiest regions of Ukraine first and then the whole country over time.\r\n\r\n\tThe United States encouraged Ukraine to give up its nuclear arsenal and to de-emphasize its military complex, but in its moment of dire need for tangible support, will we have the courage and fortitude to help stop Russian aggression, which ultimately could lead to another Cold War or worse?\r\n\r\n\tMany probably have forgotten the worldwide turmoil created during the Cold War, which ended a quarter-century ago. Allowing conditions to mature that might re-create another dominant world power hostile toward the United States could easily reinforce those radical elements who wish to see the demise of this nation. One of the ways we permit such conditions to arise is through our fiscal irresponsibility, which substantially weakens us because the borrower is subservient to the lender. Can we be objective in our treatment of nations, no matter what their actions, if we owe them great sums of money?\r\n\r\n\tRonald Reagan facilitated the demise of the Soviet Union without firing a single shot. He enacted policies that resulted in a financial meltdown that ended the brutal Soviet reign. The recent precipitous fall of the Russian stock market cannot go unnoticed by Putin, and more financial pressure applied immediately could give pause to his grandiose schemes. We could freeze Russian financial assets, downgrade trade associations or rapidly establish energy production policies to free the European Union from the Russian energy stranglehold.\r\n\r\n\tEU energy freedom would require the quick establishment of a rational energy development platform that does not cater to far-left environmentalists. Many advocates of common sense are also concerned about the environment, but are reasonable enough to realize that rather than using Environmental Protection Agency regulations to stifle abundant energy production, we can use the EPA in conjunction with the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship to produce and export a vast amount of clean energy. This could significantly improve our bargaining position throughout the world.\r\n\r\n\tWhen I was in high school in Detroit, there was a great deal of emphasis on clothing. As I became increasingly interested in fitting in with the \"in crowd,\" fashion supplanted academic achievement in my hierarchy of importance. My grades plummeted, and I became a person who was less pleasant and more self-absorbed.\r\n\n\r\n\tMy mother was disappointed because she thought I had enough insight and intelligence to avoid the flypaper trap of acting like everyone else.\r\n\r\n\tFortunately, after wasting a year pursuing acceptance, I realized that my dreams went far beyond silk shirts and sharkskin pants. I decided to forsake the \"in crowd\" and redoubled my academic efforts in time to rescue my sinking grade-point average and gain admission to an Ivy League university.\r\n\r\n\tTo say that the \"in crowd\" was disgruntled when I abandoned their association would be a gross understatement. It eventually became clear to them that I would not rejoin their ranks under any circumstances, and they left me alone.\r\n\r\n\tDespite the insults hurled at me, at the time of graduation, my classmates voted me \"most likely to succeed.\" This indicated that they knew the prerequisites for success but were unwilling to fulfill them, and they wanted others to remain shackled to their underachieving lifestyle.\r\n\r\n\tPolitical correctness (PC) operates in much the same fashion. It is in place to ensure conformity to the prescribed expressions and lifestyles dictated by the elites.\r\n\r\n\tThere are rewards of acceptance and praise for members of the \"in crowd\" as they attempt to silence or destroy any who dare think for themselves or express opposing views. Similarly, the purveyors of PC seize upon a word or phrase, which they emphasize in an attempt to divert attention away from the actual issue that doesn't fit their narrative.\r\n\r\n\tI have stated in the past that Obamacare is the worst thing to occur in our country since slavery. Why did I make such a strong statement? Obviously, I recognize the horrors of slavery. My roots have been traced back to Africa, and I am aware of some horrendous deeds inflicted on my ancestors in this country.\r\n\r\n\tThe purpose of the statement was not to minimize the most evil institution in American history, but rather to draw attention to a profound shift of power from the people to the government.\r\n\r\n\tI think this shift is beginning to wrench the nation from one centered on the rights of individual citizens to one that accepts the right of the government to control even the most essential parts of our lives. This strikes a serious blow to the concept of freedom that gave birth to this nation.\r\nAs a teenager, I began a new lifelong routine of starting and ending each day reading from the book of Proverbs, which, of course, was written by Solomon, a very wise man. Interestingly, my parents gave me the middle name of Solomon -- not that I claim even a modicum of his wisdom.\r\n\r\n\tAfter Solomon became the king of Israel, he gained great renown when two women came before him claiming to be the mother of the same infant. Solomon decreed that the baby should be divided and half given to each woman, at which time the real mother immediately relinquished her claim.\r\n\r\n\tThis made the judgment quite simple. I believe God has a sense of humor, not only because of my middle name and my affinity for Solomonic proverbs, but because I, too, gained great renown by dividing babies. In my case, it was complexly joined craniopagus twins.\r\n\r\n\tOne of the verses that seems pertinent to America today is Proverbs 22:7, which says, \"The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.\" Most of us grew up hearing that debt is a bad thing. The advent and wide dissemination of credit cards diminished such teachings, and those in charge of our nation's finances over the past few decades seem to revel in debt.\r\n\r\n\tAs a nation, we currently are carrying a national debt of $17.5 trillion. If we repaid it at a rate of $10 million per day, seven days a week, 365 days per year, it would take 4,700 years to repay. The only reason that we can sustain such a level of debt is our status as the international reserve currency for the world.\r\n\r\n\tThis is a position usually reserved for the most reliable and strongest economic nation, and this status allows us to print money. If Greece could print money, it would not be bankrupt, although it probably would continue to drive up its debt.\r\n\r\n\tAdditionally, we have unfunded liabilities of at least $100 trillion.\r\n\r\n\tWhy am I concerned about this? I have been talking about this issue since long before Russian President Vladimir Putin's recent threat to abandon the U.S. dollar as Russia's reserve currency. Unless he could attract many other nations to do the same, he likely would inflict more short-term damage on his own country than on the United States.\r\n\r\n\tNevertheless, the very mention of such an action should send shivers down our spine. He recognizes our vulnerable position, which is exacerbated by our insistence on incurring unsustainable levels of debt. I have no doubt that at a strategic moment, he will exploit our weakness.\r\nAs a child, I was attracted to anything that dealt with medicine. Many stories featured Johns Hopkins Hospital, and eventually I was privileged to spend 36 years at Johns Hopkins working with brilliant and caring colleagues who dedicated their lives to the art and science of healing.\r\n\r\n\tAfter a storybook career that included thousands of operations and many sleepless nights, I looked forward to retirement, thinking it would be relaxing. However, life throws many curveballs, and sometimes the ordering of our steps is not of our own choosing. I now find myself deeply immersed in trying to heal the health care environment, because if you cure the organism and put it back into a sick environment, you really have not accomplished very much.\r\n\r\n\tRecently, I was giving a speech in Sikeston, Mo., where I had the opportunity to be reacquainted with a 21-year-old man named T.J. He likes to go fishing and play cards with his friends, and to a stranger, he sounds like a pretty regular 20-something. However, T.J. has lived anything but a regular life.\r\n\r\n\tAt just 9 months of age, he was diagnosed with an aggressive brain tumor. His mother was told not to expect him to see his second birthday. This is news that no mother should have to hear. After 17 surgeries -- seven of which I performed in a relatively short period of time -- T.J. was finally out of the woods. Through a combination of providence and the marvels of modern medicine, T.J. survived this ordeal, and it was quite an experience to get to see him and his dedicated family again.\r\n\r\n\tI share this story to help explain why I have decided to become chairman of the Save Our Healthcare Project, which was organized by a group called the American Legacy PAC. Our mission is to lead a national citizens' effort to hold Washington accountable, re-center the health care debate around doctors and patients, and begin the process of replacing Obamacare with patient-centered reforms that will allow every American access to the best, most affordable care in the world. If you would like to join us, please visit SaveOurHealthcare.org.\r\n\r\n\tI believe a nationwide effort such as this is vital. As much as I have been privileged to treat people such as T.J., I am but one person -- and both the problems and the solutions to our health care woes are bigger than any one person.\r\nMost of us can remember feeling that someone had done us a great injustice. On those occasions, we want nothing more than to exact revenge. I remember being unfairly treated as a lowly ROTC cadet by one of the sergeants who resented the fact that my brother had been promoted to captain and company commander over him.\r\n\r\n\tI was ambitious and worked extremely hard, resulting in my promotion in record time to the rank of colonel and city executive officer. This individual was now firmly under my command, and I could have wreaked havoc in his life. Instead, I chose to give him extra responsibilities. Responding to the challenge, he proved himself to be quite capable, earning further promotions. Because I resisted the urge to retaliate, we both won. This same principle applies in politics.\r\n\r\n\tUnfortunately, in the past, we have been a reactionary country, resulting in political shifts back and forth from left to right without a lot of forward progress. After attaining power, both sides act in ways that are less than honorable, but they justify their actions by citing similar transgressions performed by the other side. This immature behavior is vividly exhibited by President Obama in his shameless use of executive orders to try to force the eventual success of Obamacare.\r\n\r\n\tAdministration supporters defend his strategy by pointing out that previous presidents have issued even more executive orders than Obama. It's like saying that punching someone 40 times is more harmful than shooting him four times. However, it's not the quantity of executive orders that matters, but their impact.\r\n\r\n\tThere are always people who attempt to pick apart an analogy, but most readers will see the point. In the current controversy, a massive politically motivated government program was forced on half of the population with their opinions completely disregarded. No legislation of this magnitude ever had been passed in the history of the United States by one party with unanimous opposition by the other party. Each executive order to sustain Obamacare is like pouring salt in a wound. Furthermore, the concept of seeking common ground is further damaged.\r\n\r\n\tWhen the political pendulum swings again, which I predict will begin this November, it is imperative for the sake of our progeny that those in power act like \"the adults in the room\" and govern in a lawful and constitutional manner. This means refraining from the use of excessive government interference in choosing winners and losers. It also means an evenhanded enforcement of all of our laws rather than repeating the Obama administration's practice of selective law enforcement. Adult governance is founded upon objectivity, not ideology.\r\nAs a child growing up in Detroit and Boston, I had many opportunities to experience the ugly face of racism and witnessed the devastating toll exacted by its mean-spirited nature.\r\n\r\n\tI was a victim of the racism of low expectations for black children, but in retrospect, I can see that many of those attitudes were based on ignorance. Large numbers of white people actually believed that blacks were intellectually inferior, and there was a host of other inaccurate beliefs that whites held about blacks and that blacks held about whites.\r\n\r\n\tMany of those misperceptions probably would have persisted if measures had not been taken to abolish the separation of the races. One of those measures was affirmative action, which was based on the admirable concept that we should take into consideration inherent difficulties faced by minorities growing up in a racist society.\r\n\r\n\tI believe that I benefited from affirmative action. When I applied to Yale University, I thought my chances of being accepted were favorable only because I was somewhat naive about admissions requirements for a high-powered Ivy League institution.\r\n\r\n\tI graduated third in my high school class rather than at the top, largely because my sophomore year was a total waste after I got caught up in the negative aspects of peer pressure and abandoned my studies for the sake of social acceptance. I had a healthy grade-point average by the time I graduated, and one of the Detroit newspapers printed an article that stated I had the highest SAT scores of any student graduating from the Detroit public schools in 20 years. I was also the city executive officer for the ROTC program and had a long list of extracurricular activities.\r\n\r\n\tIn my mind, I was pretty hot stuff. Only after I got to Yale and became cognizant of my classmates' many accomplishments did I realize that the admissions committee had taken a substantial risk on me and that I had been extended special consideration. My early academic experiences were traumatic, and but for the grace of God, I would have flunked out.\r\n\r\n\tFortunately, I was able to adjust to the academic rigors necessary to qualify for medical school admission at the University of Michigan. Medical school was transformative, and I was subsequently accepted into the selective neurosurgical residency at Johns Hopkins. By that time, no special considerations were expected or needed.\r\nWe used to characterize the Soviet Union as a godless, evil empire. Like many societies based on communism or socialism, the Soviets saw fit to minimize the importance of God and, in many cases, wreaked unimaginable persecution on religious people.\r\n\r\n\tWhy is faith in God anathema to such states? It's because they need to remove any authority other than themselves as the arbiter of right and wrong.\r\n\r\n\tInterestingly, last year Russian President Vladimir Putin criticized Euro-Atlantic countries, including the United States, of becoming godless and moving away from Christian values. Some may bristle at such an accusation, but when you consider that many Americans are hesitant even to mention God or Jesus in public, there may be some validity to his claim. We also casually have tossed out many of the principles espoused in the Bible and have concluded that there's no authority greater than man himself.\r\n\r\n\tThe separation clause of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution is inappropriately applied to a host of situations that involve religion. By reinterpreting the law to mean separation of God and state, as opposed to the original intent of keeping the church from having undue influence over state affairs and keeping government from ruling the church, secular progressives have succeeded de facto in redefining part of the Constitution. Such success, however, can only be lasting if \"we the people\" continue to yield our values and beliefs in order to get along.\r\n\r\n\tA number of years ago, some lawyers approached me to advise that we could not hang our \"Think Big\" banners in public schools. They claimed the \"G\" stood for God, and this would be tantamount to government endorsement of religion, which would be contrary to the First Amendment. I countered that the First Amendment also forbids government suppression of religious expression and suggested we pursue this argument at the U.S. Supreme Court.\r\n\r\n\tThis may have seemed like a bold and reckless statement, but it wasn't. I knew I would be going to the Supreme Court the next week to receive the Jefferson award and figured I would bring up this issue while I was there. And I did.\r\n\r\n\tJustice Sandra Day O'Connor said we were nowhere near violating the First Amendment and that of course we could put up our banners in a public school without constitutional infringement. In this case, I did not back down in the face of bogus accusations, and we prevailed. We all must have the courage to fight for our beliefs, just as our predecessors fought for our future.\r\nThere has been much discussion about income inequality recently. President Obama seems to think we can make significant progress in eliminating poverty by raising the minimum wage, as his State of the Union address highlighted.\r\n\r\nMany hope that through a simple declaration, the poor can be elevated to a higher social status. Such people fail to realize that pay is associated with value \u2014 otherwise, we could just pay everybody $1 million a year and let everybody be rich. In a capitalistic society, those individuals who produce the wherewithal to obtain income tend to be paid quite handsomely, while individuals who don't generate significant income are paid accordingly.\r\n\r\nAs in any situation that involves human beings, there will be some abuses, but generally speaking, this kind of system works by incentivizing individuals to do the things necessary to enhance their value in the marketplace.\r\n\r\nMany in the current administration and their sycophants in the news media are trying to persuade Americans that there is significant improvement in the general economy. But record numbers of people are enrolling in the food-stamp program and receiving various government subsidies. Common sense dictates that if the economy were improving, there would be an accompanying decline in the number of people depending on government supplements.\r\n\r\nAs a child, I was eyewitness to people who preferred a sedentary, nonproductive life as long as they could collect public assistance. Others, including my mother, from the exact same environment, worked incessantly to try to improve their own lives and those of their children. My mother worked as a domestic in the homes of wealthy people who were generous to her because she was dependable, honest and hardworking.\r\n\r\nThey also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Many hope that through a simple declaration, the poor can be elevated to a higher social status. Such people fail to realize that pay is associated with value \u2014 otherwise, we could just pay everybody $1 million a year and let everybody be rich. In a capitalistic society, those individuals who produce the wherewithal to obtain income tend to be paid quite handsomely, while individuals who don't generate significant income are paid accordingly.\r\n\r\nAs in any situation that involves human beings, there will be some abuses, but generally speaking, this kind of system works by incentivizing individuals to do the things necessary to enhance their value in the marketplace.\r\n\r\nMany in the current administration and their sycophants in the news media are trying to persuade Americans that there is significant improvement in the general economy. But record numbers of people are enrolling in the food-stamp program and receiving various government subsidies. Common sense dictates that if the economy were improving, there would be an accompanying decline in the number of people depending on government supplements.\r\n\r\nAs a child, I was eyewitness to people who preferred a sedentary, nonproductive life as long as they could collect public assistance. Others, including my mother, from the exact same environment, worked incessantly to try to improve their own lives and those of their children. My mother worked as a domestic in the homes of wealthy people who were generous to her because she was dependable, honest and hardworking.\r\n\r\nThey also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        As in any situation that involves human beings, there will be some abuses, but generally speaking, this kind of system works by incentivizing individuals to do the things necessary to enhance their value in the marketplace.\r\n\r\nMany in the current administration and their sycophants in the news media are trying to persuade Americans that there is significant improvement in the general economy. But record numbers of people are enrolling in the food-stamp program and receiving various government subsidies. Common sense dictates that if the economy were improving, there would be an accompanying decline in the number of people depending on government supplements.\r\n\r\nAs a child, I was eyewitness to people who preferred a sedentary, nonproductive life as long as they could collect public assistance. Others, including my mother, from the exact same environment, worked incessantly to try to improve their own lives and those of their children. My mother worked as a domestic in the homes of wealthy people who were generous to her because she was dependable, honest and hardworking.\r\n\r\nThey also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Many in the current administration and their sycophants in the news media are trying to persuade Americans that there is significant improvement in the general economy. But record numbers of people are enrolling in the food-stamp program and receiving various government subsidies. Common sense dictates that if the economy were improving, there would be an accompanying decline in the number of people depending on government supplements.\r\n\r\nAs a child, I was eyewitness to people who preferred a sedentary, nonproductive life as long as they could collect public assistance. Others, including my mother, from the exact same environment, worked incessantly to try to improve their own lives and those of their children. My mother worked as a domestic in the homes of wealthy people who were generous to her because she was dependable, honest and hardworking.\r\n\r\nThey also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        As a child, I was eyewitness to people who preferred a sedentary, nonproductive life as long as they could collect public assistance. Others, including my mother, from the exact same environment, worked incessantly to try to improve their own lives and those of their children. My mother worked as a domestic in the homes of wealthy people who were generous to her because she was dependable, honest and hardworking.\r\n\r\nThey also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        They also learned about my brother and me, because my mother would share our stellar report cards with them once we had conquered our academic doldrums. As a result, these successful people would send us significant monetary incentives to keep up the good work. One of them even loaned me his luxury convertible for a special occasion.\r\n\r\n\r\nI was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        I was never resentful of the wealthy; I was inspired by their achievements and wanted to achieve at the highest possible levels so I could realize my potential and enjoy a pleasant lifestyle.\r\n\r\nLuxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Luxury and a comfortable lifestyle are no longer goals of mine; they are byproducts of making myself valuable to society. I recognized after many difficulties in early childhood that the person who has the most to do with what happens to me in life is me. Other people and the environment could not thwart me unless I permitted it. Only my attitude and acceptance of the victim mentality could get in the way.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Several years ago, I was consulted by a young woman who was 33 weeks pregnant and was on her way to Kansas to get an abortion. I informed her of the multiple options available to her outside of abortion, and she decided to go through with the pregnancy even though the child had hydrocephalus and would require neurosurgical intervention a few weeks after birth. She kept the baby and loves the beautiful child that has resulted.\r\n\r\nA couple of decades ago, I came into the pediatric intensive care unit on morning rounds and was told about a 4-year-old girl who had been hit by an ice-cream truck and was comatose and exhibiting little neurological function other than reactive pupils. I tested her pupillary reflexes, and both pupils were fixed and dilated. The staff indicated to me that this was something that must have just occurred. I grabbed the bed and, with some help, transported her quickly to the operating room for an emergency craniotomy. I was met along the way by a senior neurosurgeon who told me I was wasting my time and that, at best, we would end up with someone in a vegetative state.\r\n\r\nNevertheless, we completed the operation, and a few days later, her pupils became reactive, and she eventually left the hospital. I saw her a few years ago walking through the hospital with her own 4-year-old little girl. She was neurologically fully intact and told me she had become somewhat of a celebrity because of the experience I just related.\r\n\r\nWhat do these two stories have in common? They both involve precious lives that easily could have been discarded.\r\n\r\nMy entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I personally have met several people who told me their mothers had considered abortion but happily decided against it.\r\n\r\nMost of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        A couple of decades ago, I came into the pediatric intensive care unit on morning rounds and was told about a 4-year-old girl who had been hit by an ice-cream truck and was comatose and exhibiting little neurological function other than reactive pupils. I tested her pupillary reflexes, and both pupils were fixed and dilated. The staff indicated to me that this was something that must have just occurred. I grabbed the bed and, with some help, transported her quickly to the operating room for an emergency craniotomy. I was met along the way by a senior neurosurgeon who told me I was wasting my time and that, at best, we would end up with someone in a vegetative state.\r\n\r\nNevertheless, we completed the operation, and a few days later, her pupils became reactive, and she eventually left the hospital. I saw her a few years ago walking through the hospital with her own 4-year-old little girl. She was neurologically fully intact and told me she had become somewhat of a celebrity because of the experience I just related.\r\n\r\nWhat do these two stories have in common? They both involve precious lives that easily could have been discarded.\r\n\r\nMy entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I personally have met several people who told me their mothers had considered abortion but happily decided against it.\r\n\r\nMost of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        Nevertheless, we completed the operation, and a few days later, her pupils became reactive, and she eventually left the hospital. I saw her a few years ago walking through the hospital with her own 4-year-old little girl. She was neurologically fully intact and told me she had become somewhat of a celebrity because of the experience I just related.\r\n\r\nWhat do these two stories have in common? They both involve precious lives that easily could have been discarded.\r\n\r\nMy entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I personally have met several people who told me their mothers had considered abortion but happily decided against it.\r\n\r\nMost of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        What do these two stories have in common? They both involve precious lives that easily could have been discarded.\r\n\r\nMy entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I personally have met several people who told me their mothers had considered abortion but happily decided against it.\r\n\r\nMost of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        My entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives. Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me. I personally have met several people who told me their mothers had considered abortion but happily decided against it.\r\n\r\nMost of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        Most of us instinctively want to protect helpless creatures and sometimes go to great lengths to do so. The television commercials about abused animals are poignant, and as a society, we sometimes delay or cancel large construction projects to protect an \"endangered\" insect, amphibian or fish. Yet many of us turn a blind eye to the wanton slaughter of millions of helpless human babies, who are much more sophisticated than some of the other creatures, when nothing is at stake other than the convenience of one or both parents. I am not saying we should abandon our efforts to save baby seals and a host of other animals.\r\n\r\nI am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        I am saying: Shouldn't we consider adding human fetuses and babies to the list?\r\n\r\n\r\n        When government grows too large, dependency replaces achievement.\r\n\r\nWhen I was in high school in Detroit, I had a job as a biology laboratory assistant. I spent a substantial amount of time in the greenhouse preparing botany experiments. I had acquired some seeds of an interesting plant and was anxious to use them to produce my own crop of these plants. I planted the seeds in a special container and kept enriching the soil and providing plenty of moisture and sunlight to enhance and accelerate the growth. I was very disappointed with the results and eventually abandoned the project, leaving the seeds in some soil behind the greenhouse to fend for themselves.\r\n\r\nTo my surprise, one day when I was behind the greenhouse, I discovered that the seeds not only had germinated, but had produced a substantial crop without my help.\r\n\r\nI realize that no analogy is perfect and that many people will try to discredit this one, but in this case, I believe the seed is similar to America when it was a fledgling group of colonies. Many people came to America from other countries because they saw an opportunity to lead the life of their choice without a lot of interference from an overarching governing structure.\r\n\r\nAlthough there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People largely were left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.\r\n\r\nGovernment plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        When I was in high school in Detroit, I had a job as a biology laboratory assistant. I spent a substantial amount of time in the greenhouse preparing botany experiments. I had acquired some seeds of an interesting plant and was anxious to use them to produce my own crop of these plants. I planted the seeds in a special container and kept enriching the soil and providing plenty of moisture and sunlight to enhance and accelerate the growth. I was very disappointed with the results and eventually abandoned the project, leaving the seeds in some soil behind the greenhouse to fend for themselves.\r\n\r\nTo my surprise, one day when I was behind the greenhouse, I discovered that the seeds not only had germinated, but had produced a substantial crop without my help.\r\n\r\nI realize that no analogy is perfect and that many people will try to discredit this one, but in this case, I believe the seed is similar to America when it was a fledgling group of colonies. Many people came to America from other countries because they saw an opportunity to lead the life of their choice without a lot of interference from an overarching governing structure.\r\n\r\nAlthough there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People largely were left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.\r\n\r\nGovernment plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        To my surprise, one day when I was behind the greenhouse, I discovered that the seeds not only had germinated, but had produced a substantial crop without my help.\r\n\r\nI realize that no analogy is perfect and that many people will try to discredit this one, but in this case, I believe the seed is similar to America when it was a fledgling group of colonies. Many people came to America from other countries because they saw an opportunity to lead the life of their choice without a lot of interference from an overarching governing structure.\r\n\r\nAlthough there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People largely were left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.\r\n\r\nGovernment plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        I realize that no analogy is perfect and that many people will try to discredit this one, but in this case, I believe the seed is similar to America when it was a fledgling group of colonies. Many people came to America from other countries because they saw an opportunity to lead the life of their choice without a lot of interference from an overarching governing structure.\r\n\r\nAlthough there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People largely were left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.\r\n\r\nGovernment plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Although there has been constant tension between those desiring a strong central government that maintains control and order and those desiring maximum personal freedom as long as the rights of others are preserved, our country managed to thrive for many decades with an unprecedented level of autonomy for its citizens. People largely were left to their own devices and could experience great financial success or profound failure without the government playing a major role, other than ensuring the rights of the citizens to pursue their dreams.\r\n\r\nGovernment plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Government plays a vital role in the smooth functioning of a successful society. In our country, it was intended that the central government would provide such services as policing, military protection, roads, sanitation, public safety and similar things. In recent years, well-meaning government officials from both parties have determined that citizens need to be more closely managed because they are not capable of acting responsibly or planning for the future. Unfortunately, many of our citizens have grown accustomed to having others regulate their lives and now take little responsibility for their own well-being and that of their families.\r\n\r\nIn the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        In the meantime, the government continues to grow at a rapid pace in order to meet the needs and expectations of the growing dependent class of citizens.\r\n\r\n\r\n        A few years ago, I was participating in a national radio interview when the questioner asked me, \"Dr. Carson, I notice that you don't speak very often about race. Why is that?\" I replied, \"It's because I'm a neurosurgeon.\"\r\n\r\nThe puzzled look on her face demanded further clarification.\r\n\r\nI proceeded to explain that when I take a patient to the operating room and open the cranium, exposing the brain, I am operating on the actual thing that makes that person who they are. The hair, scalp and skull bones are merely external coverings of the critical entity \u2014 the brain \u2014 that determines all of the most important things about us as human beings. We have a choice of concentrating on superficial characteristics, which mean little or nothing, or concentrating on the source of our humanity, our intellect, our personality and the content of our character.\r\n\r\nA few weeks ago, during her television program on the Fox News Channel, Megyn Kelly made reference to the racial makeup of Jesus Christ and Santa Claus. She indicated that in American culture they are usually portrayed as Caucasian. This ignited a firestorm of protests and disagreement, as do many innocent remarks in today's hypersensitive culture. There was little discussion of who Jesus Christ was or his message, nor was there much reference to the symbolism of Santa Claus. Instead, accusations of racist tendencies were leveled.\r\n\r\nIn the Bible, many characters are described in some detail when it is relevant to the story being told. The fact that there is little or nothing describing the physical appearance of Jesus should serve as an indicator of the irrelevance of racial descriptions for someone with such an important mission.\r\n\r\nWhy do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        The puzzled look on her face demanded further clarification.\r\n\r\nI proceeded to explain that when I take a patient to the operating room and open the cranium, exposing the brain, I am operating on the actual thing that makes that person who they are. The hair, scalp and skull bones are merely external coverings of the critical entity \u2014 the brain \u2014 that determines all of the most important things about us as human beings. We have a choice of concentrating on superficial characteristics, which mean little or nothing, or concentrating on the source of our humanity, our intellect, our personality and the content of our character.\r\n\r\nA few weeks ago, during her television program on the Fox News Channel, Megyn Kelly made reference to the racial makeup of Jesus Christ and Santa Claus. She indicated that in American culture they are usually portrayed as Caucasian. This ignited a firestorm of protests and disagreement, as do many innocent remarks in today's hypersensitive culture. There was little discussion of who Jesus Christ was or his message, nor was there much reference to the symbolism of Santa Claus. Instead, accusations of racist tendencies were leveled.\r\n\r\nIn the Bible, many characters are described in some detail when it is relevant to the story being told. The fact that there is little or nothing describing the physical appearance of Jesus should serve as an indicator of the irrelevance of racial descriptions for someone with such an important mission.\r\n\r\nWhy do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        I proceeded to explain that when I take a patient to the operating room and open the cranium, exposing the brain, I am operating on the actual thing that makes that person who they are. The hair, scalp and skull bones are merely external coverings of the critical entity \u2014 the brain \u2014 that determines all of the most important things about us as human beings. We have a choice of concentrating on superficial characteristics, which mean little or nothing, or concentrating on the source of our humanity, our intellect, our personality and the content of our character.\r\n\r\nA few weeks ago, during her television program on the Fox News Channel, Megyn Kelly made reference to the racial makeup of Jesus Christ and Santa Claus. She indicated that in American culture they are usually portrayed as Caucasian. This ignited a firestorm of protests and disagreement, as do many innocent remarks in today's hypersensitive culture. There was little discussion of who Jesus Christ was or his message, nor was there much reference to the symbolism of Santa Claus. Instead, accusations of racist tendencies were leveled.\r\n\r\nIn the Bible, many characters are described in some detail when it is relevant to the story being told. The fact that there is little or nothing describing the physical appearance of Jesus should serve as an indicator of the irrelevance of racial descriptions for someone with such an important mission.\r\n\r\nWhy do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        A few weeks ago, during her television program on the Fox News Channel, Megyn Kelly made reference to the racial makeup of Jesus Christ and Santa Claus. She indicated that in American culture they are usually portrayed as Caucasian. This ignited a firestorm of protests and disagreement, as do many innocent remarks in today's hypersensitive culture. There was little discussion of who Jesus Christ was or his message, nor was there much reference to the symbolism of Santa Claus. Instead, accusations of racist tendencies were leveled.\r\n\r\nIn the Bible, many characters are described in some detail when it is relevant to the story being told. The fact that there is little or nothing describing the physical appearance of Jesus should serve as an indicator of the irrelevance of racial descriptions for someone with such an important mission.\r\n\r\nWhy do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        In the Bible, many characters are described in some detail when it is relevant to the story being told. The fact that there is little or nothing describing the physical appearance of Jesus should serve as an indicator of the irrelevance of racial descriptions for someone with such an important mission.\r\n\r\nWhy do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Why do we in America, almost half a century after the death of Martin Luther King, still continue to make judgments based on the color of one's skin rather than the content of one's character? Those who seem most concerned about race are the so-called \"progressives,\" some of whom claim that if we stop fanning the flames of racial injustice, we will return to the days when racial prejudice was acceptable.\r\n\r\nThis kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        This kind of pessimism is unwarranted, and we need to remember that a great deal of the racism of the past was based on total ignorance, which bred fear and hatred. Those wishing to maintain the unjust status quo were in no hurry to allow the truth to be revealed to whites or blacks about the other side, because such revelations would dispel myths and foster harmony.\r\n\r\nThus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        Thus, segregation and blissful ignorance were maintained at all costs. The fear and loathing that characterize the political atmosphere in America today are also based on ignorance.\r\n\r\n\r\n        \r\n\t  Earlier this year, one of the mainstream media networks was planning to do a special on my retirement from neurosurgery. They recorded a lecture I gave at my medical school, as well as one given at a high school in Detroit. They also accompanied me to my old stomping grounds, where many of the neighbors came out to greet me and talk about old times.\r\n\r\n\t  I was struck by some of their comments, including the notion that I always had lofty, unrealistic dreams, but that they would enjoy hearing about them anyway. Someone else told me that people would always murmur among themselves when I approached, \"Here comes Mr. Know-It-All. Let's get out of here.\" While the network decided not to air the special for some reason unknown to me, it was still a valuable opportunity for me to catch up with old acquaintances.\r\n\r\n\t  Similarly, some years ago, I attended the 25th reunion of my high school graduating class. The thing that struck me the most was that many of the \"really cool\" guys were dead. Many of my other classmates told me how proud they were of my accomplishments and asked me if I remembered how they used to encourage me. Of course I did not \u2014 no such encouragement took place \u2014 but people's memories tend to change over time.\r\n\r\n\t  Many of my fellow members of the Horatio Alger Society of Distinguished Americans have recounted similar stories of being regarded as different and not always being part of the \"in\" crowd when they were growing up. The Horatio Alger Society inducts 10 to 12 new members each year. These are people who grew up under very difficult circumstances and went on to achieve at the highest levels of their respective endeavors. Many of their names would be quite familiar to the public. Are their stories aberrant, or are we truly the captains of our own destiny?\r\n\r\n\t  In the game of chess, pawns are just used for the purposes of the royal pieces. In real life, many in power selfishly use \"pawns\" \u2014 average citizens \u2014 while at the same time vociferously proclaiming that they are the only ones looking out for the interests of the pawns, who happily follow their commands, thinking that this \"royal\" contingent has their interests in mind.\r\n\r\n\t  However, in a chess game, a pawn can become any one of the royal pieces, if it can make it to the other side of the board. The opponent will do almost anything to keep one from reaching its goal, because that would interfere with the power structure. If they can keep the pawns on their side of the board, where it is much safer, the status quo can be maintained.\r\n"