Why on earth was I lying on the
backseat of a blue minivan with tinted
windows? Good question. I was trying
to leave my home in Washington, D.C.,
without being seen by the reporters
staked out front.
It was the evening of June 5, 2008,
and I was heading to a secret meeting
with Barack Obama—and not the one I
had hoped for and expected until just a
few months earlier. I had lost and he had
won. There hadn’t been time yet to come
to grips with that reality. But here we
were. The Presidential primary
campaign was historic because of his
race and my gender, but it had also been
grueling, heated, long, and close. I was
disappointed and exhausted. I had
campaigned hard to the very end, but
Barack had won and now it was time to
support him. The causes and people I
had campaigned for, the Americans who
had lost jobs and health care, who
couldn’t afford gas or groceries or
college, who had felt invisible to their
government for the previous seven years,
now depended on his becoming the
forty-fourth President of the United
States.
This was not going to be easy for me,
or for my staff and supporters who had
given it their all. In fairness, it wasn’t
going to be easy for Barack and his
supporters either. His campaign was as
wary of me and my team as we were of
them. There had been hot rhetoric and
bruised feelings on both sides, and,
despite a lot of pressure from his
backers, I had refused to quit until the
last vote was counted.
Barack and I had spoken two days
earlier, late in the evening after the final
primaries in Montana and South Dakota.
“Let’s sit down when it makes sense for
you,” he said. The next day we crossed
paths backstage at a long-scheduled
conference for the American Israel
Public Affairs Committee in
Washington. While a bit awkward, it
gave our closest aides a chance to begin
discussing details about a meeting. For
me, that was my traveling Chief of Staff,
Huma Abedin, the savvy, indefatigable,
and gracious young woman who had
worked for me since my time in the
White House. For Obama, it was Reggie
Love, the former Duke University
basketball player who rarely left
Barack’s side. Huma and Reggie had
kept open a line of communication even
during the most intense days of the
campaign, a hotline of sorts, in part
because after every primary, no matter
who won, either Barack or I called the
other to concede and offer
congratulations. We exchanged calls that
were cordial, sometimes even
lighthearted, since at least one person on
the line had reason to be in a good
mood. But more than a few calls were
curt, just checking the box. Football
coaches meet midfield after a game, but
they don’t always hug.
We needed a place away from the
media spotlight to meet and talk, so I
called my good friend Senator Dianne
Feinstein of California to ask if we
could use her Washington home. I’d
been there before and thought it would
work well for us to come and go without
drawing attention. The ruse succeeded. I
slid around in the van’s backseat as we
took the sharp left turn at the end of my
street onto Massachusetts Avenue, and I
was on my way.
I got there first. When Barack arrived,
Dianne offered us each a glass of
California Chardonnay and then left us in
her living room, sitting in wing chairs
facing each other in front of the
fireplace. Despite our clashes over the
past year, we had developed a respect
for each other rooted in our shared
experiences. Running for President is
intellectually demanding, emotionally
draining, and physically taxing. But
crazy as a national campaign can be, it is
our democracy in action, warts and all.
Seeing that up close helped us
appreciate each other for having gotten
into “the arena,” as Theodore Roosevelt
called it, and going all the way.
By the time of our meeting I had
known Barack for four years, two of
which we spent debating each other.
Like many Americans, I was impressed
by his speech at the 2004 Democratic
National Convention in Boston. Earlier
that year I had supported his Senate
campaign by hosting a fund-raiser at our
home in Washington and attending one in
Chicago. In my Senate office, to the
surprise of many as time went on, I kept
a photo of him, Michelle, their
daughters, and me taken at that Chicago
event. The photo was where I left it
when I returned to the Senate full-time
after the primaries. As colleagues, we
had worked together on a number of
shared priorities and legislation. After
Hurricane Katrina, Bill and I invited
Barack to join us in Houston with
President George H. W. and Barbara
Bush to visit evacuees from the storm
and meet with emergency management
officials.
We were both lawyers who got our
start as grassroots activists for social
justice. Early in my career I worked for
the Children’s Defense Fund, registered
Hispanic voters in Texas, and
represented poor people as a Legal Aid
attorney. Barack was a community
organizer on the South Side of Chicago.
We had very different personal stories
and experiences, but we shared the oldfashioned idea that public service is a
noble endeavor, and we believed deeply
in the basic bargain at the heart of the
American Dream: No matter who you
are or where you come from, if you
work hard and play by the rules, you
should have the opportunity to build a
good life for yourself and your family.
But campaigns are based on
highlighting differences, and ours was no
exception. Despite our general
agreement on most issues, we found
plenty of reasons to disagree and
exploited any opening to draw a
contrast. And although I understood that
high-stakes political campaigns are not
for the fainthearted or thin-skinned, both
Barack and I and our staffs had long lists
of grievances. It was time to clear the
air. We had a White House to win, and it
was important for the country, and for
me personally, to move on.
We stared at each other like two
teenagers on an awkward first date,
taking a few sips of Chardonnay. Finally
Barack broke the ice by ribbing me a bit
about the tough campaign I had run
against him. Then he asked for my help
uniting our party and winning the
presidency. He wanted the two of us to
appear together soon, and he wanted the
Democratic National Convention in
Denver to be unified and energized. He
emphasized that he wanted Bill’s help as
well.
I had already decided that I would
agree to his request for help, but I also
needed to raise some of the unpleasant
moments of the past year. Neither of us
had had total control over everything
said or done in our campaigns, let alone
by our most passionate supporters or by
the political press, including a large
herd of bloggers. Remarks on both sides,
including some of my own, had been
taken out of context, but the preposterous
charge of racism against Bill was
particularly painful. Barack made clear
that neither he nor his team believed that
accusation. As to the sexism that
surfaced during the campaign, I knew
that it arose from cultural and
psychological attitudes about women’s
roles in society, but that didn’t make it
any easier for me and my supporters. In
response Barack spoke movingly about
his grandmother’s struggle in business
and his great pride in Michelle, Malia,
and Sasha and how strongly he felt they
deserved full and equal rights in our
society.
The candor of our conversation was
reassuring and reinforced my resolve to
support him. While I would definitely
have preferred to be asking for his
support instead of the other way around,
I knew his success was now the best
way to advance the values and
progressive policy agenda I had spent
the past two years—and a lifetime—
fighting for.
When he asked what he needed to do
to convince my supporters to join his
campaign, I said he’d need to give them
time, but a genuine effort to make them
feel welcome would persuade the vast
majority to come around. After all, he
was now the standard-bearer for our
agenda. If I could shift from doing my
best to beat him to doing everything I
could to elect him President, so could
they. Eventually almost all of them did.
After an hour and a half, we’d both
said what we wanted to say and talked
about how to move forward. Later that
night Barack emailed a proposed joint
statement that would be released by his
campaign confirming the meeting and our
“productive discussion” about what
“needs to be done to succeed in
November.” He also asked for a number
to call Bill so that they could speak
directly.
The next day, June 6, Bill and I hosted
my campaign staff in the backyard of our
house in D.C. It was a boiling hot day.
We all tried not to overheat as we
reminisced about the unbelievable twists
and turns of the primary season. Being
surrounded by the dedicated team that
had fought so hard for me was inspiring
and humbling. Some were friends who
had worked with us on campaigns going
all the way back to Arkansas. For many
of the younger people, this was their first
race. I didn’t want them to be
discouraged by defeat or turned off of
electoral politics and public service, so
I told them to be proud of the campaign
we’d run and to keep working for the
causes and candidates we believed in. I
also knew I had to lead by example, and
while my fireside chat with Barack the
night before was a start, it was only that.
It would take time for many to get past
all that had happened, and I knew that
people would be taking their cues from
me. So, starting right then, I made clear I
would be supporting Barack Obama 100
percent.
Despite the circumstances, people
relaxed and had a good time. My dear
friend Stephanie Tubbs Jones, the
fearless African American
Congresswoman from Ohio who resisted
intense pressure and stayed by my side
throughout the primaries, dangled her
feet in the swimming pool and told funny
stories. Two months later she would die
suddenly from a brain aneurism, a
terrible loss for her family and
constituents and for me and my family.
For this day at least, we were still
sisters in arms, looking forward to better
days ahead.
I signed off on the time and place for
my final campaign appearance the next
day and began to work on my speech.
Writing this one was complicated. I had
to thank my supporters, celebrate the
historic significance of my campaign as
the first woman to win a primary, and
endorse Barack in a way that would help
him in the general election. That was a
lot of freight for one speech to carry, and
I didn’t have much time to get it right. I
remembered bitter primary battles that
went all the way to the Convention,
especially Ted Kennedy’s failed
challenge to President Carter in 1980,
and I would not let that history repeat
itself. It would not be good for our party
or for the country, so I was going to
move quickly to publicly back Barack
and campaign for him.
I wanted to strike the right balance
between respecting my voters’ support
and looking toward the future. In person
and over the phone, I went back and
forth with speechwriters and advisors
seeking the right tone and language. Jim
Kennedy, an old friend with a magic
touch for evocative language, had woken
up in the middle of the night thinking
about how the 18 million people who
had voted for me had each added a hole
in the ultimate glass ceiling. That gave
me something to build on. I didn’t want
to repeat the standard bromides; this
endorsement had to be in my own words,
a convincing personal argument about
why we should all work to elect Barack.
I stayed up until the early hours of the
morning, sitting at our kitchen table with
Bill making revisions to draft after draft.
I gave my speech on Saturday, June 7,
at the National Building Museum in
Washington. We’d had trouble finding a
location that could hold the expected
number of supporters and press. I was
relieved when we settled on what used
to be called the “Pension Building,”
with its soaring columns and high
ceilings. Originally built to serve Civil
War veterans, widows, and orphans, it
is a monument to the American spirit of
shared responsibility. Bill, Chelsea, and
my then eighty-nine-year-old mother,
Dorothy Rodham, were with me as I
made my way through the crowd to the
podium. People were crying before I
even started talking.
The atmosphere was a bit like a wake,
charged with sadness and anger to be
sure, but also with pride and even love.
One woman wore a huge “Hillary for
Pope!” button. Well, that certainly
wasn’t in the stars, but I was moved by
the sentiment.
If the speech was hard to write, it was
even harder to deliver. I felt I had let
down so many millions of people,
especially the women and girls who had
invested their dreams in me. I started by
thanking everyone who had campaigned
and voted for me; I told them I believed
in public service and would remain
committed to “helping people solve their
problems and live their dreams.”
I gave a special shout-out to the
women of my mother’s generation, who
were born before women even had the
right to vote but lived long enough to see
my campaign for President. One of them
was eighty-eight-year-old Florence
Steen of South Dakota, who insisted that
her daughter bring an absentee ballot to
her hospice bedside so she could vote in
the Democratic primary. She passed
away before the election, though, so
under state law her ballot didn’t count.
But her daughter later told a reporter,
“My dad’s an ornery old cowboy, and he
didn’t like it when he heard mom’s vote
wouldn’t be counted. I don’t think he had
voted in 20 years. But he voted in place
of my mom.” Being a vessel for the
hopes and prayers of millions of people
was a daunting responsibility, and I tried
never to forget that the campaign was
about them far more than it was about
me.
I addressed the disappointment of my
supporters directly: “Although we
weren’t able to shatter that highest,
hardest glass ceiling this time, thanks to
you, it’s got about 18 million cracks in
it. And the light is shining through like
never before, filling us all with the hope
and the sure knowledge that the path will
be a little easier next time. That has
always been the history of progress in
America.” I pledged, “You will always
find me on the front lines of democracy
—fighting for the future.” Then I added,
“The way to continue our fight now, to
accomplish the goals for which we
stand, is to take our energy, our passion,
our strength and do all we can to help
elect Barack Obama the next President
of the United States.”
As hard as all this was for me, I
learned a lot from losing. I had
experienced my share of personal and
public disappointments over the years,
but until 2008 I had enjoyed an unusual
run of electoral successes—first as part
of my husband’s campaigns in Arkansas
and for President, and then in my races
for Senate in 2000 and 2006. The night
of the Iowa caucuses, when I placed
third, was excruciating.
As I moved on to New Hampshire,
and then across the country, I found my
footing and my voice. My spirits were
lifted and my determination hardened by
the many Americans I met along the way.
I dedicated my victory in the Ohio
primary to everyone across America
“who’s ever been counted out but
refused to be knocked out, and for
everyone who has stumbled but stood
right back up, and for everyone who
works hard and never gives up.” The
stories of the people I met reaffirmed my
faith in the unbounded promise of our
country but also drove home just how
much we had to do to ensure that that
promise was shared by all. And although
the campaign was long and exhausting,
and cost way too much money, in the end
the process succeeded in offering voters
a real choice about the future of the
country.
One silver lining of defeat was that I
came out of the experience realizing I no
longer cared so much about what the
critics said about me. I learned to take
criticism seriously but not personally,
and the campaign certainly tested me on
that. It also freed me. I could let my hair
down—literally. Once, in an interview
during a trip to India when I was
Secretary of State, Jill Dougherty of
CNN asked about the media’s obsession
with my showing up in foreign capitals
after long flights wearing glasses and no
makeup. “Hillary Au Naturale” she
called it. I had to laugh. “I feel so
relieved to be at the stage I’m at in my
life right now, Jill, because if I want to
wear my glasses, I’m wearing my
glasses. If I want to pull my hair back,
I’m pulling my hair back.” Some of the
reporters covering me at the State
Department were surprised when I
occasionally ditched the diplomatic
talking points and said exactly what was
on my mind, whether it was telling off
the leader of North Korea or pushing the
Pakistanis on the whereabouts of Osama
bin Laden. But I no longer had much
patience for walking on eggshells.
Losing also would give me the chance
to talk to leaders of other nations about
how to accept difficult verdicts at home
and move forward for the good of one’s
country. All over the world there are
heads of state who claim to stand for
democracy, but then do all they can to
suppress it when voters protest or
decide to vote them out of office. I
realized I had the chance to offer a
different model. Of course, I was lucky
to have lost to a candidate whose views
dovetailed closely with my own and
who had taken such pains to include me
on his team. Still, the fact that we had
been fierce opponents and were now
working together was a pretty
impressive argument for democracy—
one that I would find myself making in
the years to come time and time again
around the world in a job I had no idea
I’d be doing.

Three weeks after my speech at the
Building Museum, I was on the way to
Unity, New Hampshire, a town chosen
for my first joint appearance with
Barack not only for its name but also
because we had both gotten exactly the
same number of votes there in the
primary: 107 votes for Barack and 107
for me. We met in Washington and flew
together on his campaign plane. When
we landed there was a large tour bus
waiting to take us the nearly two hours to
Unity. I thought back to the amazing bus
tour Bill and I took with Al and Tipper
Gore right after the 1992 Democratic
Convention and remembered Timothy
Crouse’s famous book about the 1972
campaign, The Boys on the Bus. This
time I was the “girl” on the bus, and the
candidate wasn’t me or my husband. I
took a deep breath and got on board.
Barack and I sat together talking
easily. I shared some of our experiences
raising a daughter in the White House.
He and Michelle were already thinking
about what life might be like for Malia
and Sasha if he won. The rally itself, in
a big field on a gorgeous summer day,
was designed to send an unmistakable
message: the primary was behind us and
we were now one team. People chanted
both our names as we walked on stage to
U2’s “Beautiful Day.” Large letters
behind the crowd spelled out U-N-I-TY, and a blue banner behind the stage
read, “Unite for Change.” “Today and
every day going forward,” I told the
crowd, “we stand shoulder to shoulder
for the ideals we share, the values we
cherish, and the country we love.” When
I finished, they started cheering, “Thank
you, Hillary. Thank you, Hillary.” Even
Barack joined in. “You guys peeked at
my speech. You already know the first
line,” he joked. Then he spoke
eloquently and generously about the race
I had run. Bill and Barack had a long
talk a few days later, clearing up
lingering issues from the primaries and
agreeing to campaign together.
The biggest event of the summer was
the Democratic National Convention in
Denver at the end of August. I had
attended every Democratic convention
since 1976, and, for obvious reasons, I
had particularly fond memories from
1992 in New York and 1996 in Chicago.
This time Barack asked me to deliver a
prime-time speech formally nominating
him, and I agreed.
When the time came, Chelsea
introduced me. I could not have been
prouder of her or more grateful for how
hard she had worked throughout the long
primary campaign. She had crisscrossed
the country on her own, speaking to
young people and energizing crowds
everywhere she went. Seeing her
standing there before the packed
convention hall, I couldn’t get over how
poised and altogether adult she had
become.
Soon it was my turn. I was greeted by
a sea of red-white-and-blue “Hillary”
signs. For as many speeches as I’d
given, this was a big one, in front of a
huge audience in the arena and millions
more watching on TV. I have to admit I
was nervous. I tinkered with the speech
right up until the very last minute, so that
when my motorcade arrived one of my
aides had to leap out of the van and
sprint ahead to hand the thumb drive to
the teleprompter operator. The Obama
campaign had asked to see it much
earlier, and when I didn’t share it, some
of his advisors worried I must be hiding
something they wouldn’t want me to say.
But I was simply using every second I
had to get it right.
It was not the speech I had long hoped
to deliver at this convention, but it was
an important one. “Whether you voted
for me, or you voted for Barack, the time
is now to unite as a single party with a
single purpose. We are on the same
team, and none of us can afford to sit on
the sidelines. This is a fight for the
future. And it’s a fight we must win
together,” I told the crowd. “Barack
Obama is my candidate. And he must be
our President.” Afterward Joe Biden
greeted me outside the green room,
falling on bent knee to kiss my hand.
(Who says chivalry is dead!) Barack
called from Billings, Montana, to thank
me.
Earlier that day I had run into
Michelle backstage at an event, and she
was also appreciative of everything we
were doing to help Barack. Of course,
Bill was not the only spouse in the race,
and Barack and I both learned that often
it’s your family who take attacks on you
the hardest. But Michelle and I bonded
over the challenges of raising a family in
the public eye. Months later, over a
private lunch in the Yellow Oval Room
on the second floor of the White House,
we talked about how the new First
Family was settling in and her plans to
combat childhood obesity through
healthier eating and exercise. We sat at a
small table looking out the windows
facing south, over the Truman Balcony,
toward the Washington Monument. This
was my first visit back to the family
quarters since leaving on January 20,
2001. I loved seeing the residence staff,
who help every President’s family feel
at home in the White House. When I
became First Lady back in 1993, it
meant so much to me to hear from
Jacqueline Kennedy, Lady Bird Johnson,
Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter, Nancy
Reagan, and Barbara Bush about their
experiences. Only a few of us have had
the privilege of living in the People’s
House, and I wanted to provide any
support I could.
I had thought my speech to the
convention would be my only role there,
but a determined group of my delegates
still intended to vote for me during the
roll call of the states. The Obama
campaign asked if I would go to the
convention the next day and interrupt the
roll call and instead move for an
immediate declaration that Barack
Obama was our party’s nominee. I
agreed but understood why more than a
few of my friends, supporters, and
delegates begged me not to do it. They
wanted to finish what they had started.
They also wanted history to record that a
woman had won nearly two dozen
primaries and caucuses and close to one
thousand nine hundred delegates,
something that had never happened
before. They argued that if the roll call
was cut short, our efforts would never
be properly recognized. I couldn’t help
but be moved by their fierce loyalty, but
I thought it was more important to show
that we were completely united.
Some of my supporters were also
upset that Barack had chosen Biden to be
his running mate instead of me. But I was
never interested in being Vice President.
I was looking forward to returning to the
Senate, where I hoped to help lead the
charge on health care reform, job
creation, and other urgent challenges. I
heartily approved of Barack’s choice
and knew Joe would be an asset in the
election and in the White House.
We kept my going to the floor a
secret, so it caused quite a stir among the
delegates and reporters when I suddenly
appeared among the thousands of excited
Democrats just as New York was called
to announce its votes. Surrounded by
friends and colleagues, I declared,
“With eyes firmly fixed on the future, in
the spirit of unity, with the goal of
victory, with faith in our party and our
country, let’s declare together in one
voice right here, right now, that Barack
Obama is our candidate and he will be
our President.” Then I moved to suspend
the roll call and nominate Barack by
acclamation. Up at the podium, Speaker
of the House Nancy Pelosi asked if there
was a second for my motion, and the
whole convention roared its approval.
The atmosphere crackled with energy
and history in the making as we rallied
together behind the first African
American nominee of a major party.
There was one more big surprise that
week. The morning after Barack
addressed the convention, Senator John
McCain, the presumptive Republican
nominee, announced that Governor Sarah
Palin of Alaska was his choice for
running mate. A resounding “Who?”
echoed across the nation. We would all
get to know her in the coming months,
but at that point she was a near-complete
unknown, even to political junkies. The
Obama campaign suspected that her
nomination was a blatant attempt to
scuttle their hope of welcoming the
women who had vigorously supported
me. They immediately issued a
dismissive statement and reached out to
me in the hopes I would follow suit. But
I wouldn’t. I was not going to attack
Palin just for being a woman appealing
for support from other women. I didn’t
think that made political sense, and it
didn’t feel right. So I said no, telling
them there’d be plenty of time for
criticism. A few hours later, the Obama
campaign reversed itself and
congratulated Governor Palin.
Over the following weeks, Bill and I
attended more than one hundred events
and fund-raisers in which we spoke with
supporters and undecided voters and
advocated for Barack and Joe. On the
morning of November 4—Election Day
—we went to a local elementary school
near our home in Chappaqua, New York,
to cast our votes. It was the end of an
unbelievably long journey. That night
Bill was glued to the television, doing
what he always does on election nights:
analyzing all the data he could find on
turnout and early exit polls. Now that
there was nothing more we could do to
help, I tried to stay busy with other
things until there was a result. It turned
out to be a decisive victory, without the
drawn-out waiting game we had seen in
2004 or, famously, in 2000. Huma called
Reggie Love, and soon I was
congratulating the President-elect.
(That’s how I started thinking of him,
referring to him, and addressing him the
moment the election was over, just as
after the inauguration he would become
“Mr. President.”) I was elated, proud,
and, frankly, relieved. It was time to
exhale, and I was looking forward to
getting back to the life and work I loved.

Five days after the election was a quiet
Sunday afternoon, offering the perfect
chance to decompress. The autumn air
was crisp, and Bill and I decided to go
to Mianus River Gorge, one of the many
trails near where we live in Westchester
County. With our hectic lives, we often
seek to clear our minds with long walks
together. I remember that one as
particularly liberating. The election was
over, and I could get back to my job in
the Senate. I loved representing the
people of New York, and the campaign
had left me with a full agenda that I was
eager to push forward. I was brimming
with ideas, all of which I hoped would
be strengthened by a close relationship
with the incoming President.
Little did I know how close that
relationship would become. In the
middle of our walk, Bill’s cell phone
rang. When he answered he heard the
voice of the President-elect, who told
him he wanted to talk to both of us. Bill
explained that we were in the middle of
a nature preserve and needed to call
back when we got home. Why was he
calling? Maybe he wanted our input on
the team he was putting together. Or to
strategize about a major policy
challenge, like economic recovery or
health care reform. Or perhaps he simply
wanted to line up our help for a quick
burst of legislative activity in the spring.
Bill, remembering his own hectic
transition, guessed that he wanted to run
names by us for White House and
Cabinet positions.
When we got back to our house, Bill’s
prediction about the call proved to be
accurate—for him. The President-elect
picked his brain about possible members
of the economic team he was assembling
to tackle the financial crisis facing the
country. Then he told Bill that he was
looking forward to getting together with
me sometime soon. I assumed he wanted
to talk about working closely together on
his legislative package in the Senate.
But I was curious, so I called a few
members of my Senate staff to see what
they thought, including my spokesman,
Philippe Reines. Philippe is passionate,
loyal, and shrewd. He usually knows
what Washington’s movers and shakers
are thinking even before they do. And I
can always trust him to speak his mind.
This time was no different. Philippe had
told me two days earlier about rumors
that I would be named everything from
Secretary of Defense to Postmaster
General, but he had confidently
predicted, “He’s going to offer you
Secretary of State.” “That’s ridiculous!”
I responded immediately. “Not for a
million reasons!” I thought, not for the
first time, that Philippe was delusional.
And frankly I was not interested in
serving in the Cabinet. I wanted to go
back to the Senate and my work for New
York. From 9/11 to the financial crash of
2008, it had been a rough eight years for
New Yorkers. They had taken a chance
on me back in 2000, and now they
needed a strong and committed advocate
in Washington. And I liked being my
own boss and setting my own schedule
and agenda. Joining the Cabinet would
mean giving up some of that autonomy.
When I called Philippe on Sunday, he
informed me that the media had started
its cycle of speculation. ABC’s This
Week mentioned rumors that Presidentelect Obama was considering me for the
position of Secretary of State. The
program added that he was attracted by
the idea of having a “team of rivals” in
the Cabinet, an allusion to the 2005 bestselling history by Doris Kearns
Goodwin, recounting Abraham Lincoln’s
choice in 1860 of William Henry
Seward, a Senator from New York, to
be his Secretary of State after defeating
him for the Republican nomination.
Over time I had become a big fan of
Seward’s, so this parallel was
particularly intriguing to me. He was one
of the leading lights of his day, a
principled reformer, a strong critic of
slavery, Governor and Senator from
New York, and ultimately Secretary of
State. He also helped President Lincoln
draft the Proclamation of Thanksgiving,
marking the day as an American holiday.
He was described by a contemporary as
“ruffled or excited never, astute, keen to
perceive a joke, appreciative of a good
thing, and fond of ‘good victuals.’ ” I
could relate to that.
Seward had been a well-regarded
Senator from New York when he tried to
get the presidential nomination, before
running into a versatile, up-and-coming
politician from Illinois. The parallel
was not perfect; I hope no one ever
describes me as a “wise macaw,” which
is how Seward appeared to the historian
Henry Adams. And I was privately
amused that the man who did more than
anyone to thwart Seward’s chances for
President was the journalist Horace
Greeley, who has a prominent statue in
Chappaqua.
Seward also appealed to me for
reasons that went deeper than historical
coincidences. I had been to his house in
Auburn, New York, a stop on the
Underground Railroad for slaves fleeing
to freedom from the South. It was filled
with mementos of an extraordinary
career and his fourteen-month trip
around the world after leaving office.
The diplomatic gallery includes tributes
from nearly all of the world’s leaders,
most of whom were crowned monarchs,
paying tribute to a humble servant of
democracy.
For all his worldliness, Seward was
deeply devoted to his constituents, and
they to him. He spoke eloquently about
the inclusive country America could be.
And he followed up his words with
actions. Harriet Tubman, the heroic
conductor of the Underground Railroad,
settled in a house in Seward’s
hometown, on land purchased from
Seward himself. His friendship with
Lincoln was especially moving. After
conceding defeat in their contest for the
nomination, Seward worked hard for
Lincoln’s election, crossing the country
by rail and giving speeches. He soon
became one of Lincoln’s trusted
advisors. He was there at the beginning,
suggesting the breathtaking final
paragraph of Lincoln’s first inaugural
address, which Lincoln turned into an
appeal to “the better angels of our
nature.” And he was there at the end; the
plot to kill Lincoln included a
coordinated attack on Seward as well,
though he survived. Lincoln and Seward
traveled a great distance together, and
their friendship and hard work helped
save the Union.
Seward’s work was not quite done
when the Civil War ended. In 1867, in a
final burst of statesmanship, he
engineered the purchase of Alaska from
Russia. The price, $7.2 million, was
considered so extravagant that the deal
was called “Seward’s Folly,” although
we now realize it was one of the great
land transactions in American history
(and a steal at 2 cents an acre). Right
after graduating from college, I spent a
memorable few months in Alaska,
gutting fish and washing dishes. Now, as
my name began to be referenced more
often in connection with the job at State,
I started to wonder if Seward’s ghost
was following me. Still, I had to ask
myself, if the President-elect asked me
to serve, was it pure folly to abandon the
Senate and my entire domestic agenda
for a short-term assignment at State?

The night after President-elect Obama’s
phone call with Bill, a reporter at
Glamour’s Women of the Year awards
ceremony in New York City asked me
on my way into the event whether I
would consider accepting a position in
the Obama Administration. I expressed
what I was feeling at the time: “I am
happy being a Senator from New York.”
That was true. But I was also enough of
a realist to know that anything can
happen in politics.
The morning of Thursday, November
13, I flew to Chicago with Huma to meet
with the President-elect, and made it
there uneventfully. When we arrived at
the transition headquarters, I was
ushered into a large wood-paneled room
furnished with a few chairs and one
folding table, where I would meet alone
with the President-elect.
He looked more relaxed and rested
than he had for months. Even though he
faced the most serious economic crisis
since the Great Depression, he appeared
confident. As I later saw him do often,
he went straight to the point by skipping
the small talk and asking me to serve as
his Secretary of State. He told me he had
been thinking of me for the position for a
while and believed I was the best person
—in his words, the only person—who
could serve in that role at this moment in
time, with the unique challenges
America faced at home and abroad.
Despite all the whispers, rumors, and
point-blank questions, I was still
floored. Only months before, Barack
Obama and I had been locked in one of
the hardest-fought primary campaigns in
history. Now he was asking me to join
his administration, in the most senior
Cabinet post, fourth in the line of
succession to the presidency. This was
like a rerun of the final season of The
West Wing; there, too, the new
President-elect offers his defeated
opponent the job of Secretary of State. In
the TV version, the rival turns down the
job at first, but the President-elect
refuses to take no for an answer.
In real life, President-elect Obama
presented a well-considered argument,
explaining that he would have to
concentrate most of his time and
attention on the economic crisis and
needed someone of stature to represent
him abroad. I listened carefully and then
respectfully declined his offer. Of
course I was honored to be asked. I
cared deeply about foreign policy and
believed that it was essential to restore
our country’s damaged standing in the
world. There were two wars to wind
down, emerging threats to counter, and
new opportunities to seize. But I also
felt passionately invested in reversing
the massive job losses we were seeing
at home, fixing our broken health care
system, and creating new opportunities
for working families in America. People
were hurting and needed a champion to
fight for them. All of that and more was
waiting for me in the Senate. Plus there
were so many seasoned diplomats who I
thought could also be great Secretaries.
“What about Richard Holbrooke?” I
suggested. “Or George Mitchell?” But
the President-elect would not be put off,
and I left saying that I would think about
it. On the flight back to New York, I
thought about nothing else.
Before I even landed back in New
York, press speculation was intense.
Two days later, “Obama’s Talk with
Clinton Creates Buzz” ran on the front
page of the New York Times, noting that
the prospect of my nomination as the
nation’s top diplomat could provide a
“surprise ending” to the “Obama-Clinton
drama” of the Presidential campaign.
Out of respect for the President-elect, I
avoided confirming that an offer had
even been made.
I had promised to think it over, so I
did. Over the course of the next week, I
talked extensively with family, friends,
and colleagues. Bill and Chelsea were
patient listeners and urged me to
carefully weigh the offer. My friends
were evenly divided between
enthusiasm and skepticism. I had a lot to
think about and only a few days to make
up my mind. The job was tantalizing, and
I was confident I could do it well. I’d
been grappling for years with the
challenges facing the United States
around the world, as both First Lady and
Senator, and I already had relationships
with many key leaders, from Angela
Merkel in Germany to Hamid Karzai in
Afghanistan.
John Podesta, a valued friend, the
cochair of the Obama Transition Team,
and a former Chief of Staff for my
husband in the White House, called me
on November 16 to talk over a few
issues and to reinforce how much the
President-elect wanted me to accept. We
discussed some of the more practical
concerns, like how I would pay off more
than $6 million remaining from my
campaign debt if I became Secretary of
State and therefore would have to stay
out of partisan politics. I also did not
want to do anything that would limit the
life-saving work Bill was doing around
the world through the Clinton
Foundation. Much was made in the press
about possible conflicts of interest
between his philanthropic efforts and my
potential new position. That problem
was quickly dispatched after the
Presidential Transition Team vetted the
Foundation’s donors and Bill agreed to
disclose all their names. Bill also had to
give up holding overseas versions of the
innovative philanthropy conference he
had started, the Clinton Global Initiative,
to avoid any perceived conflict. “The
good you can do as Secretary of State
will more than outweigh whatever work
I have to cut back on,” Bill assured me.
Throughout this process, and for the
next four years, Bill was, as he had been
for decades, my essential support and
sounding board. He reminded me to
focus on the “trendlines,” not just the
headlines, and to relish the experiences.
I sought the advice of a few of my
trusted colleagues. Senators Dianne
Feinstein and Barbara Mikulski and
Congresswoman Ellen Tauscher
encouraged me to accept, as did my
fellow Senator from New York, Chuck
Schumer. While many enjoyed pointing
out how different Chuck and I were and
how competitive we were at times, the
truth is that he and I were a great team,
and I respected his instincts. Senate
Majority Leader Harry Reid surprised
me when he told me the President-elect
had asked him what he thought of the
idea earlier in the fall, during a
campaign stop in Las Vegas. He said that
although he didn’t want to lose me in the
Senate, he didn’t see how I could refuse
the request.
And so my deliberations continued.
One hour I leaned toward accepting; the
next I was making plans for legislation I
would introduce in the new session of
Congress. I didn’t know it then, but I
later learned of the shenanigans my team
and the President-elect’s were playing to
make it tough for me to say no. My staff
told me it was Joe Biden’s birthday so
that I would call him two days earlier
than the real date, giving Joe the
opportunity to add to the cajoling.
Incoming White House Chief of Staff
Rahm Emanuel pretended the Presidentelect was indisposed when I tried to call
to say no.
Finally, the President-elect and I
spoke on the phone in the wee hours of
November 20. He was attentive to my
concerns, answered my questions, and
was enthusiastic about the work we
might do together. I told him that
although Bill’s charitable work and my
campaign debt weighed on me, I was
most worried about whether my highest
and best use was serving in the Senate
rather than the Cabinet. And, to be
honest, I was looking for a more regular
schedule after the long campaign. I laid
all this out, and he listened patiently—
and then assured me all my concerns
could be addressed.
Shrewdly, the President-elect also
steered the conversation away from the
job offer and toward the job itself. We
talked about the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan, the perpetual challenges
posed by Iran and North Korea, and how
the United States might emerge swiftly
and confidently from the recession. It
was great to exchange ideas in a
comfortable private conversation after a
year spent hammering away at each other
under the hot lights of televised
campaign debates. In retrospect, this
conversation was even more important
than it seemed at the time. We were
laying the groundwork for a shared
agenda that would guide American
foreign policy for years to come.
Yet my answer was still no. The
President-elect again refused to accept
that. “I want to get to yes,” he told me.
“You’re the best person for the job.” He
would not take no for an answer. That
impressed me.
After I hung up, I stayed up most of the
night. What would I expect if the tables
were turned? Suppose I had been elected
President and wanted Barack Obama to
serve as my Secretary of State? Suppose
I had inherited the challenges facing
him? Of course I would want him to say
yes—and quickly, so we could move on
to other problems. I would want the most
talented public servants to come together
and work hard, for the good of the
nation. The more I thought about it, the
more I knew the President-elect was
right. The country was in trouble, both at
home and abroad. He needed a Secretary
of State who could step immediately
onto the global stage and begin repairing
the damage we had inherited.
Finally, I kept returning to a simple
idea: When your President asks you to
serve, you should say yes. As much as I
loved my work in the Senate and
believed I had more to contribute there,
he said he needed me in the State
Department. My father served in the
Navy in World War II, training young
sailors to go off to fight in the Pacific.
And although he often grumbled about
the decisions various Presidents made in
Washington, he and my mother instilled
in me a deep sense of duty and service.
It was reinforced by my family’s
Methodist faith, which taught us, “Do all
the good you can, at all the times you
can, to all the people you can, as long as
ever you can.” The call to service had
helped me decide to take the plunge into
elected office when I launched my first
Senate campaign in 2000, and now it
helped me make the hard choice to leave
the Senate and accept the position of
Secretary of State.

By the morning I had reached my
decision, and I asked to speak to the
President-elect one more time. He was
delighted that I had come around. He
guaranteed that I would have direct
access to him and could see him alone
whenever I needed to. He said I could
choose my own team, though he would
have some suggestions. As someone who
had been in the White House, I knew
how important both of those promises
were. History had shown time and again
that the State Department could be
neglected by the White House, usually
with negative results. The Presidentelect assured me that this time would be
different: “I want to be sure you’re
successful.” He went on to say that he
knew our foreign policy partnership
would not be without mistakes and
turbulence, but that we would strive to
make the best decisions possible for our
country. We had not yet developed the
close relationship that would follow, but
I was touched when he said, “Contrary
to reports, I think we can become good
friends.” That comment stuck with me in
the years to come.
The President fully lived up to his
promises. He gave me free rein to
choose my team, relied on my advice as
his chief foreign policy advisor on the
major decisions on his desk, and insisted
on meeting often so we could speak
candidly. He and I generally sat down
together at least once a week when we
weren’t traveling. Then there were full
Cabinet meetings, National Security
Council meetings, and bilateral meetings
with visiting foreign leaders—and those
were just the meetings with the President
in attendance. I also met regularly at the
White House with the Secretary of
Defense and the National Security
Advisor. If you add it all up, despite my
vigorous travel schedule, I was at the
White House more than seven hundred
times during my four years. After losing
the election, I never expected to spend
so much time there.
In the years to come, I wouldn’t
always agree with the President and
other members of his team; some of
those times you’ll read about in this
book, but others will remain private to
honor the cone of confidentiality that
should exist between a President and his
Secretary of State, especially while he is
still in office. But he and I developed a
strong professional relationship and,
over time, forged the personal friendship
he had predicted and that I came to value
deeply. Not too many weeks into the
new administration, on a mild April
afternoon, the President suggested we
finish one of our weekly meetings at the
picnic table outside the Oval Office on
the South Lawn, right next to Malia and
Sasha’s new playground. That suited me
perfectly. The press called it our “picnic
table strategy session.” I’d call it “Two
folks having a good conversation.”
On Monday, December 1, Presidentelect Obama announced me as his choice
to serve as the sixty-seventh Secretary of
State. As I stood next to him, he
reiterated publicly what he had told me
privately: “Hillary’s appointment is a
sign to friend and foe of the seriousness
of my commitment to renew American
diplomacy.”
The next month, on January 20, 2009,
I watched with my husband in the biting
cold as Barack Obama took the oath of
office. Our rivalry, once fierce, was
over. Now we were partners.
2

Foggy Bottom: Smart
Power

The first Secretary of State I ever met
was Dean Acheson. He had served
President Harry Truman at the beginning
of the Cold War and was the
embodiment of an imposing, old-school
diplomat. I was a nervous college
student about to deliver the first
important public speech of my young
life. It was the spring of 1969, and my
Wellesley classmate and friend Eldie
Acheson, the former Secretary’s
granddaughter, had decided our class
needed its own speaker at graduation.
After our college president approved the
idea, my classmates asked me to speak
about our tumultuous four years at
Wellesley and provide a proper send-off
into our unknown futures.
The night before graduation, with the
speech still unfinished, I ran into Eldie
and her family. She introduced me to her
grandfather as “the girl who’s going to
speak tomorrow.” The seventy-six-yearold had just completed his memoirs,
Present at the Creation, which would
go on to win the Pulitzer Prize the
following year. Secretary Acheson
smiled and shook my hand. “I’m looking
forward to hearing what you have to
say,” he said. In a panic, I hurried back
to my dorm to pull one last all-nighter.
I never imagined that forty years later
I would follow in Acheson’s footsteps at
the State Department, affectionately
known as “Foggy Bottom,” after its D.C.
neighborhood. Even my childhood
dreams of becoming an astronaut would
have seemed more realistic. Yet after I
became Secretary of State, I often
thought of the gray-haired elder
statesman I met that night at Wellesley.
Beneath his formal exterior, he was a
highly imaginative diplomat, breaking
protocol when he thought it was best for
his country and his President.
America’s leadership in the world
resembles a relay race. A Secretary, a
President, a generation are all handed
the baton and asked to run a leg of the
race as well as we can, and then we
hand off the baton to our successors. Just
as I benefited from actions taken by and
lessons learned from my predecessors,
initiatives begun during my years at the
State Department have borne fruit since
my departure, when I passed the baton to
Secretary John Kerry.
I quickly learned that being Secretary
of State is really three jobs in one: the
country’s chief diplomat, the President’s
principal advisor on foreign policy, and
the CEO of a sprawling Department.
From the start I had to balance my time
and energy between competing
imperatives. I had to lead our public and
private diplomacy to repair strained
alliances and build new partnerships.
But I also had to conduct a fair amount
of diplomacy within our own
government, especially in the policy
process at the White House and with
Congress. And there was the work
inside the Department itself, to get the
most out of our talented people, improve
morale, increase efficiency, and develop
the capacities needed to meet new
challenges.
A former Secretary called me with
this advice: “Don’t try to do everything
at once.” I heard the same thing from
other Department veterans. “You can try
to fix the policies, or you can try to fix
the bureaucracy, but you can’t do both.”
Another piece of advice I heard
frequently was: Pick a few big issues
and own them. Neither admonition
squared with the increasingly complex
international landscape waiting for us.
Perhaps there was a time when a
Secretary of State could focus
exclusively on a few priorities and let
deputies and assistants handle the
Department and the rest of the world.
But those days were over. We’d learned
the hard way (for example, in
Afghanistan after the Soviet withdrawal
in 1989) that neglecting regions and
threats could have painful consequences.
I would need to pay attention to the
whole chessboard.
In the years since 9/11, America’s
foreign policy understandably had
become focused on the biggest threats.
And of course, we had to stay vigilant.
But I also thought we should be doing
more to seize the greatest opportunities,
especially in the Asia-Pacific.
I wanted to deal with a range of
emerging challenges that were going to
require high-level attention and creative
strategies, such as how to manage
competition for undersea energy
resources from the Arctic to the Pacific,
whether to stand up to economic bullying
by powerful state-owned enterprises,
and how to connect with young people
around the world newly empowered by
social media, to name just a few. I knew
there would be traditionalists in the
foreign policy establishment who would
question whether it was worth a
Secretary of State’s time to think about
the impact of Twitter, or start programs
for women entrepreneurs, or advocate
on behalf of American businesses
abroad. But I saw it all as part of the job
of a 21st-century diplomat.

The newly chosen members of the
incoming Obama Administration’s
national security team met for six hours
in Chicago on December 15. It was our
first discussion since the announcement
of our nominations two weeks earlier.
We quickly dove into some of the
thorniest policy dilemmas we would
face, including the status of the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan and the prospects
for peace in the Middle East. We also
discussed at length a problem that has
proven very difficult to solve: how to
fulfill the President-elect’s promise to
close the military prison at Guantánamo
Bay, Cuba, which remains open all these
years later.
I came to the Obama Administration
with my own ideas about both American
leadership and foreign policy, as well as
about the teamwork any President should
expect from the members of his National
Security Council. I intended to be a
vigorous advocate for my positions
within the administration. But as I knew
from history and my own experience, the
sign on Harry Truman’s desk in the Oval
Office was correct: the buck did stop
with the President. And because of the
long primary battle, I also knew the
press would be looking—even hoping—
for any signs of discord between me and
the White House. I intended to deprive
them of that story.
I was impressed by the people the
President-elect had chosen for his team.
Vice President–elect Joe Biden brought
a wealth of international experience
from his leadership of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee. His
warmth and humor would be very
welcome during long hours in the White
House Situation Room. Every week, Joe
and I tried to meet for a private breakfast
at the Naval Observatory, his official
residence, which is near my home.
Always the gentleman, he would meet
me at the car and walk me to a sunny
nook off the porch, where we would eat
and talk. Sometimes we agreed,
sometimes we disagreed, but I always
appreciated our frank and confidential
conversations.
I had known Rahm Emanuel for years.
He started with my husband early in the
1992 campaign, served in the White
House, and then went home to Chicago
and ran for Congress. He was a rising
star in the House and led the campaign
that produced a new Democratic
majority in 2006, but gave up his seat
when President Obama asked him to be
White House Chief of Staff. Later he
would be elected Mayor of Chicago.
Rahm was famous for his forceful
personality and vivid language (that’s
putting it politely), but he was also a
creative thinker, an expert in the
legislative process, and a great asset to
the President. During the hard-fought
primary campaign, Rahm had stayed
neutral because of his strong ties to both
me and then-Senator Obama, telling his
hometown Chicago Tribune, “I’m hiding
under the desk.” Now that we were all
serving together, Rahm would provide
some of the initial glue holding this
“team of rivals” together. He offered a
friendly ear and an open door in the
West Wing, and we talked frequently.
The new National Security Advisor
was retired Marine General James
Jones, whom I had gotten to know from
my time on the Senate Armed Services
Committee, when he served as Supreme
Allied Commander Europe. He was a
dignified, levelheaded, fair broker, with
a sense of humor, all important qualities
in a National Security Advisor.
General Jones’s Deputy and eventual
successor was Tom Donilon, whom I
had known since the Carter
Administration. Tom had served as
Secretary of State Warren Christopher’s
Chief of Staff, so he understood and
valued the State Department. He also
shared my enthusiasm for increasing our
engagement in the Asia-Pacific. Tom
became a valued colleague who
oversaw the difficult interagency policy
process that analyzed options and teed
up decisions for the President. He had a
knack for asking hard questions that
forced us to think even more rigorously
about important policy decisions.
The President’s choice for UN
Ambassador was Susan Rice, who had
served on the National Security Council
staff and then as Assistant Secretary of
State for African Affairs during the
1990s. During the primaries Susan was
an active surrogate for the Obama
campaign and often went on TV to attack
me. I knew it was part of her job, and
we put the past behind us and worked
together closely—for example, to round
up votes at the UN for new sanctions
against Iran and North Korea and to
authorize the mission to protect civilians
in Libya.
In a surprise to many, the President
kept on Secretary of Defense Robert
Gates, who had a distinguished career
serving eight Presidents of both parties
at the CIA and National Security
Council, before President George W.
Bush lured him from Texas A&M in
2006 to replace Donald Rumsfeld at the
Pentagon. I had seen Bob in action from
my seat on Armed Services and thought
he would provide continuity and a
steady hand as we dealt with two
inherited wars. He was also a
convincing advocate for giving
diplomacy and development more
resources and a bigger role in our
foreign policy. You’ll rarely hear any
official in turf-conscious Washington
suggest that some other agency should
get a more generous share of funding.
But Bob, looking at the larger strategic
picture after many years in which U.S.
foreign policy was dominated by the
military, believed it was time for more
balance among what I was calling the 3
Ds of defense, diplomacy, and
development.
The easiest place to see the imbalance
was in the budget. Despite the popular
belief that foreign aid accounted for at
least a quarter of the federal budget, the
truth was that for every dollar spent by
the federal government, just one penny
went to diplomacy and development. In
a 2007 speech, Bob said that the foreign
affairs budget was “disproportionately
small relative to what we spend on the
military.” As he often pointed out, there
were as many Americans serving in
military marching bands as in the entire
diplomatic corps.
We became allies from the start, tagteaming Congress for a smarter national
security budget and finding ourselves on
the same side of many internal
administration policy debates. We
avoided the traditional in-fighting
between State and Defense that in many
previous administrations had come to
resemble the Sharks and the Jets from
West Side Story. We held joint meetings
with Defense and Foreign Ministers, and
sat together for interviews to present a
united front on the foreign policy issues
of the day.
In October 2009, we did a joint town
hall event at George Washington
University, broadcast and moderated by
CNN. We were asked what it was like
to work together. “Most of my career,
the Secretaries of State and Defense
weren’t speaking to one another,” Bob
replied, drawing laughter. “It could get
pretty ugly, actually. So it’s terrific to
have the kind of relationship where we
can talk together. . . . We get along, we
work together well. I think it starts with,
frankly, based on my experience as
Secretary of Defense being willing to
acknowledge that the Secretary of State
is the principal spokesperson for United
States foreign policy. And once you get
over that hurdle, the rest of it kind of
falls into place.”

Our team inherited a daunting list of
challenges at a time of diminished
expectations at home and abroad about
America’s ability to lead the world.
If you picked up a newspaper in those
days or stopped by a Washington think
tank, you were likely to hear that
America was in decline. Soon after the
Presidential election in 2008, the
National Intelligence Council, a group of
analysts and experts appointed by the
Director of National Intelligence,
published an alarming report titled
Global Trends 2025: A Transformed
World. It offered a bleak forecast of
declining American influence, rising
global competition, dwindling
resources, and widespread instability.
The intelligence analysts predicted that
America’s relative economic and
military strength would decrease over
the coming years and that the
international system we had helped build
and defend since World War II would be
undermined by the growing influence of
emerging economic powers like China,
oil-rich nations like Russia and Iran, and
nonstate actors like al Qaeda. In
unusually stark terms they called it “an
historic transfer of relative wealth and
economic power from West to East.”
Shortly before President Obama’s
inauguration, the Yale historian Paul
Kennedy wrote a column for the Wall
Street Journal under the headline
“American Power Is on the Wane.”
Articulating a critique heard frequently
in 2008 and 2009, Professor Kennedy
blamed declining U.S. power on
mounting debt, the severe economic
impact of the Great Recession, and the
“imperial overstretch” of the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan. He offered an
evocative analogy to explain how he
saw America losing its place as
undisputed global leader: “A strong
person, balanced and muscular, can
carry an impressively heavy backpack
uphill for a long while. But if that person
is losing strength (economic problems),
and the weight of the burden remains
heavy or even increases (the Bush
Doctrine), and the terrain becomes more
difficult (rise of new Great Powers,
international terrorism, failed states),
then the once-strong hiker begins to slow
and stumble. That is precisely when
nimbler, less heavily burdened walkers
get closer, draw abreast, and perhaps
move ahead.”
Nonetheless I remained fundamentally
optimistic about America’s future. My
confidence was rooted in a lifetime of
studying and experiencing the ups and
downs of American history and a cleareyed assessment of our comparative
advantages relative to the rest of the
world. Nations’ fortunes rise and fall,
and there will always be people
predicting catastrophe just around the
corner. But it’s never smart to bet
against the United States. Every time
we’ve faced a challenge, whether war or
depression or global competition,
Americans have risen to meet it, with
hard work and creativity.
I thought these pessimistic analyses
undervalued many of America’s
strengths, including our capacity for
resilience and reinvention. Our military
was by far the most powerful in the
world, our economy was still the
biggest, our diplomatic influence was
unrivaled, our universities set the global
standard, and our values of freedom,
equality, and opportunity still drew
people from everywhere to our shores.
When we needed to solve a problem
anywhere in the world, we could call on
dozens of friends and allies.
I believed that what happened to
America was still largely up to
Americans, as had always been the case.
We just needed to sharpen our tools and
put them to their best use. But all this
talk of decline did underscore the scope
of the challenges we faced. It
reconfirmed my determination to take a
page from Steve Jobs and “think
different” about the role of the State
Department in the 21st century.

Secretaries come and go every few
years, but most of the people at the State
Department and the U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID) stay
far longer. Together those agencies
employ about seventy thousand people
around the world, the vast majority of
whom are career professionals who
serve continuously over several
administrations. That’s far fewer than
the more than 3 million working for the
Defense Department, but it’s still a
sizable number. When I became
Secretary, the career professionals at
State and USAID had been facing
shrinking budgets and growing demands,
and they were eager for leadership that
championed the important work they did.
I wanted to be that leader. To do so, I
would need a senior team that shared my
values and was relentlessly focused on
getting results.
I recruited Cheryl Mills to be my
Counselor and Chief of Staff. We had
become friends when Cheryl served as
Deputy Counsel in the White House
during the 1990s. She talked fast and
thought even faster; her intellect was like
a sharp blade, slicing and dicing every
problem she encountered. She also had a
huge heart, boundless loyalty, rock-solid
integrity, and a deep commitment to
social justice. After the White House,
Cheryl went on to hold distinguished
legal and managerial positions in the
private sector and at New York
University, where she was serving as
senior vice president. She told me she
would help with my transition to State
but did not want to leave NYU for a
permanent role in the government.
Thankfully, she changed her mind about
that.
She helped me manage “the Building,”
which is what everyone at State calls the
bureaucracy, and directly oversaw some
of my key priorities, including food
security, global health policy, LGBT
rights, and Haiti. She also acted as my
principal liaison to the White House on
sensitive matters, including personnel
issues. Despite the President’s pledge
that I could pick my own team, there
were some heated debates early on with
his advisors as I tried to recruit the best
possible talent.
One debate was over Capricia
Marshall, who I wanted for Chief of
Protocol, the senior official responsible
for welcoming foreign leaders to
Washington, organizing summits,
engaging with the diplomatic corps,
traveling with the President abroad, and
selecting the gifts he and I would present
to our counterparts. As First Lady, I
learned how important protocol is to
diplomacy. Being a generous host and a
gracious guest helps build relationships,
while the alternative can result in
unintended snubs. So I wanted to be sure
we were at the top of our game.
As White House Social Secretary in
the 1990s, Capricia already knew what
the job required, but the White House
wanted someone who had supported the
President during the primaries. I thought
this was short-sighted but understood
that some friction and growing pains
were inevitable as we worked to merge
the sprawling entities known as
Obamaworld and Hillaryland. “We’re
going to figure this out,” I assured
Capricia. “I wouldn’t be pushing this if
you weren’t the right person for the job
—and you are.”
The President asked me if we needed
a peace process between Cheryl and
Denis McDonough, one of his closest
advisors, but no intervention was
required. They worked it out and
Capricia got the job. I knew she would
not disappoint, and she didn’t. Denis
later recounted the story of how he and
his wife, Kari, heard Capricia do an
interview on NPR one morning. Kari
was enchanted and asked about this
“absolutely elegant” diplomat. Denis
admitted that he had originally opposed
appointing her. Kari thought he was
crazy, and Denis agreed. He later told
Cheryl, “No wonder I lost that one. And
good thing I did.”
Capricia’s success was a microcosm
of the journey we all went through, from
campaign rivals to respectful colleagues.
Cheryl and Denis, the two lead
combatants in our early dustups, became
not only colleagues but also friends.
They talked constantly nearly every day
and met for early-morning breakfasts on
the weekends, strategizing over eggs and
hot chocolate. Near the end of my tenure
as Secretary, the President sent a
farewell note to Cheryl, saying that we
had grown from a “team of rivals” into
“an unrivaled team.”

I also was determined to recruit Richard
Holbrooke, a force of nature who was
widely viewed as the premier diplomat
of our generation. His hands-on efforts
brought peace to the Balkans in the
1990s. As UN Ambassador, he
convinced Republicans to pay our UN
dues and emphasized HIV/AIDS as a
security issue. Soon after accepting the
job as Secretary, I asked him to serve as
our Special Representative for
Afghanistan and Pakistan. From the first
day in office the new administration
would face serious questions about the
future of the war in Afghanistan,
especially whether to send more troops,
as the military wanted. No matter what
the President decided, we would need
an intensified diplomatic and
development effort in both countries.
Richard had the experience and moxie to
pursue that goal.
Another priority was, as ever, the
pursuit of peace in the Middle East. I
asked former Senator George Mitchell to
lead our effort. George was Holbrooke’s
opposite, as buttoned up as Richard was
wide open, but he had a wealth of
experience and expertise. He had
represented Maine in the Senate for
fifteen years, including six as Majority
Leader. After stepping down in the mid1990s, he worked with my husband to
midwife the Irish peace process. He
later headed the Sharm el-Sheikh FactFinding Committee, which investigated
the second intifada, the Palestinian
uprising that began in 2000.
Many Presidents and Secretaries of
State had used Special Envoys for
targeted missions and to coordinate
policy on certain matters across our
government. I had seen how well that
could work. Some commentators said
the appointment of high-profile
diplomats like Holbrooke and Mitchell
would diminish my role in important
policy- and decision making. That’s not
the way I saw it. Appointing people who
were qualified to serve as Secretary
themselves enhanced my reach and the
administration’s credibility. They would
be force multipliers, reporting to me but
working closely with the White House.
The President agreed and came to the
State Department along with the Vice
President to announce both Richard and
George. I was proud that men of such
stature would agree to serve in these
roles as part of my team. After long and
distinguished careers, neither Richard
nor George needed to take on what were
by any measure difficult, if not
impossible, assignments. But they were
patriots and public servants who
answered the call.
I also needed top-notch Deputy
Secretaries to help run the Department.
President Obama’s one personnel
recommendation to me was that I
consider Jim Steinberg for my Deputy
Secretary for Policy. Some in the press
speculated that Jim would be seen as an
Obama plant and predicted there would
be tension between us. I thought that was
just silly. I had known Jim since he
served as Deputy National Security
Advisor during the Clinton
Administration. During the 2008
primaries he offered foreign policy
advice to both campaigns and both the
President and I held him in high regard.
He was also a student of the AsiaPacific, a region I wanted to prioritize. I
offered him the job, and in our first
meeting I made it clear that I viewed us
as one team. Jim felt exactly the same
way. In mid-2011, Jim left to become
dean of the Maxwell School at Syracuse
University. I asked Bill Burns, an
exceptionally talented and experienced
career diplomat, to take his place.
Traditionally there had been only one
Deputy Secretary of State. I learned that
a second Deputy position, for
management and resources, had been
authorized by Congress but never filled.
I was eager to bring in a senior manager
who could help me fight for the
resources the Department needed up on
Capitol Hill and at the White House, and
to make sure they were spent wisely. I
chose Jack Lew, who had served as
Director of the Office of Management
and Budget at the end of the 1990s. His
financial and management expertise
would prove invaluable as we worked
together to institute policy reviews and
organizational changes.
When the President asked Jack to
reprise his old role at OMB in 2010, he
was seamlessly succeeded by Tom
Nides, who had long experience in both
business and public service. His years
as Chief of Staff to Speaker of the House
Tom Foley and then to my friend U.S.
Trade Representative Mickey Kantor
prepared him well to advocate for the
Department with Congress and to go to
bat for U.S. companies abroad. He
brought superb negotiating skills to a
number of thorny issues, including a
highly sensitive standoff with Pakistan
that he helped resolve in 2012.

As my confirmation hearing before the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee
approached, I dove into intensive
preparation. Jake Sullivan, an earnest
and brilliant Minnesotan with
impeccable credentials (Rhodes scholar,
Supreme Court clerk, Senate aide), had
been a trusted advisor on my
Presidential campaign and had assisted
then-Senator Obama with debate prep
during the general election. I asked Jake
to work with Lissa Muscatine, my friend
and a former White House speechwriter,
who reprised that role at State. They
helped me formulate a clear message for
the hearing and answers for what we
anticipated would be questions on every
issue under the sun. Jake went on to
become my Deputy Chief of Staff for
Policy and later Director of Policy
Planning and was at my side nearly
everywhere I went for the next four
years.
A transition team, working with
career professionals at State, deluged
me with thick briefing books and inperson sessions on every topic
imaginable, from the budget for the
Building’s cafeteria to the policy
concerns of every member of Congress.
I’ve seen my fair share of briefing
books, and I was impressed with the
depth, magnitude, and order of these
State Department products. Great care
went into the smallest details, and a
broad (at times byzantine) clearance
process allowed experts from across the
Department and the wider government to
weigh in on the substance.
Beyond the formal briefing process, I
spent those weeks reading, thinking, and
reaching out to experts and friends. Bill
and I took long walks, talking about the
state of the world. Our old friend Tony
Blair visited me at home in Washington
in early December. He updated me on
his work with the “Quartet”—the United
States, United Nations, European Union,
and Russia—on Middle East peace
negotiations since resigning as Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom in June
2007.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
invited me to her apartment in the
Watergate complex for a private dinner
that gave us a chance to discuss policy
challenges and personnel decisions I
would face. She made just one request:
Would I keep on her driver? I agreed
and soon became as dependent on him as
Condi had been.
Condi held another dinner for me with
her senior staff, on the eighth floor of the
State Department in one of the formal
dining rooms that are tucked away there.
Her advice about what I should expect in
my new role proved very helpful.
I spoke with the living former
Secretaries of State. This is a fascinating
club that transcends partisan differences.
They had each taken a leg of the relay
race and were eager to help me grab the
baton and get off to a fast start.
Madeleine Albright was my longtime
friend and partner in promoting rights
and opportunities for women and agreed
to chair a new public-private
partnership to foster entrepreneurship
and innovation in the Middle East.
Warren Christopher gave me what might
be the most practical advice I received:
Don’t plan vacations in August because
something always seems to happen that
month, such as Russia invading Georgia
in 2008. Henry Kissinger checked in
with me regularly, sharing astute
observations about foreign leaders and
sending me written reports on his
travels. James Baker supported the State
Department’s efforts to preserve the
ceremonial Diplomatic Reception
Rooms and to realize the long-standing
goal of building a museum for American
diplomacy in Washington. Colin Powell
provided candid assessments of
individuals and ideas that the President
and I were considering. Lawrence
Eagleburger, the first and only career
Foreign Service officer to serve as
Secretary of State, joined me for the
fiftieth anniversary of the Department’s
Operations Center (or “Ops,” as
everyone in the Building calls it). But it
was George Shultz who gave me the best
gift of all: a teddy bear that sang “Don’t
Worry, Be Happy” when its paw was
squeezed. I kept it in my office, first as a
joke, but every so often it really did help
to squeeze the bear and hear that song.
I thought a lot about the experiences of
my predecessors, going back to the first
Secretary, Thomas Jefferson. Crafting
American foreign policy has always
been a high-wire balancing act between
continuity and change. I tried to imagine
what Dean Acheson, whom I had met all
those years before at Wellesley, and his
illustrious predecessor, George C.
Marshall, had thought about the
tumultuous international landscape of
their day.
In the late 1940s the Truman
Administration’s mission was to create a
new world—a free world—out of the
destruction of World War II and in the
shadow of the Cold War. Acheson
described it as a task “just a bit less
formidable than that described in the
first chapter of Genesis.” Old empires
were breaking up and new powers were
emerging. Much of Europe was in ruins
and menaced by Communism. In what
was then called the Third World, people
long oppressed were finding their voice
and demanding the right to selfdetermination.
General Marshall, a hero of World
War II who served as both Secretary of
State and Secretary of Defense under
Truman, understood that America’s
security and prosperity depended on
capable allies who would share our
interests and buy our goods. Even more
important, he knew that America had a
responsibility and an opportunity to lead
the world and that new challenges meant
leading in new ways.
Marshall and Truman launched an
ambitious plan to rebuild Europe’s
shattered countries and ward off the
spread of Communism using every
element of American power: military,
economic, diplomatic, cultural, and
moral. They reached across the aisle to
build bipartisan support for their efforts
and enlisted business leaders, labor
organizers, and academics to help
explain their goals to the American
people.
Sixty years later, at the end of the first
decade of the 21st century, our country
once again found itself navigating a
rapidly changing world. Technology and
globalization had made the world more
interconnected and interdependent than
ever, and we were grappling with
drones, cyber warfare, and social media.
More countries—including China, India,
Brazil, Turkey, and South Africa—had
influence in global debates, while
nonstate actors such as civil society
activists, multinational corporations, and
terrorist networks were playing greater
roles in international affairs, for good
and ill.
Although some may have yearned for
an Obama Doctrine—a grand unified
theory that would provide a simple and
elegant road map for foreign policy in
this new era, like “containment” did
during the Cold War—there was nothing
simple or elegant about the problems we
faced. Unlike the Cold War days, when
we faced a single adversary in the
Soviet Union, we now had to contend
with many opposing forces. So like our
predecessors after World War II, we
had to update our thinking to match the
changes we were seeing all around us.
Foreign policy experts often refer to
the system of institutions, alliances, and
norms built up after World War II as
“architecture.” We still needed a rulesbased global order that could manage
interactions between states, protect
fundamental freedoms, and mobilize
common action. But it would have to be
more flexible and inclusive than before.
I came to liken the old architecture to the
Parthenon in Greece, with clean lines
and clear rules. The pillars holding it up
—a handful of big institutions, alliances,
and treaties—were remarkably sturdy.
But time takes its toll, even on the
greatest of edifices, and now we needed
a new architecture for a new world,
more in the spirit of Frank Gehry than
formal Greek classicism. Where once a
few strong columns could hold up the
weight of the world, now a dynamic mix
of materials, shapes, and structures was
needed.
For decades foreign policy tools had
been categorized as either the “hard
power” of military force or the “soft
power” of diplomatic, economic,
humanitarian, and cultural influence. I
wanted to break the hold of this outdated
paradigm and think broadly about where
and how we could use all the elements
of American foreign policy in concert.
Beyond the traditional work of
negotiating treaties and attending
diplomatic conferences, we had to—
among other tasks—engage activists on
social media, help determine energy
pipeline routes, limit carbon emissions,
encourage marginalized groups to
participate in politics, stand up for
universal human rights, and defend
common economic rules of the road. Our
ability to do these things would be
crucial measures of our national power.
This analysis led me to embrace a
concept known as smart power, which
had been kicking around Washington for
a few years. Harvard’s Joseph Nye,
Suzanne Nossel of Human Rights Watch,
and a few others had used the term,
although we all had in mind slightly
different meanings. For me, smart power
meant choosing the right combination of
tools—diplomatic, economic, military,
political, legal, and cultural—for each
situation.
The goal of smart power and our
expanded focus on technology, publicprivate partnerships, energy, economics,
and other areas beyond the State
Department’s standard portfolio was to
complement more traditional diplomatic
tools and priorities, not replace them.
We wanted to bring every resource to
bear on the biggest and toughest national
security challenges. Throughout this
book, you’ll see examples of how this
worked. Consider our efforts on Iran.
We used new financial tools and
private-sector partners to enforce
stringent sanctions and cut Iran off from
the global economy. Our energy
diplomacy helped reduce sales of
Iranian oil and drummed up new
supplies to stabilize the market. We
turned to social media to communicate
directly with the Iranian people and
invested in new high-tech tools to help
dissidents evade government repression.
All of that bolstered our old-fashioned
shoe-leather diplomacy, and together
they advanced our core national security
objectives.

On January 13, 2009, I sat across the
table from my Senate colleagues for my
confirmation hearing with the Foreign
Relations Committee. Over more than
five hours I explained why and how I
planned to redefine the role of Secretary,
outlined positions on our most pressing
challenges, and answered questions on
everything from Arctic policy to
international economics to energy
supplies.
On January 21, the full Senate
confirmed my appointment by a vote of
94 to 2. Later that day, in a small,
private ceremony in my Senate office in
the Russell Building, surrounded by my
Senate staff, Judge Kay Oberly
administered the oath to me as my
husband held the Bible.
On January 22, in keeping with the
tradition for all new Secretaries, I
walked into the State Department
through its main entrance on C Street.
The lobby was full of cheering
colleagues. I was overwhelmed and
humbled by their enthusiastic welcome.
Fluttering in a long row were the flags of
every country in the world with which
the United States maintains diplomatic
relations. I would visit more than half of
those countries, 112 in all, during the
whirlwind that was about to begin. “I
believe, with all of my heart, that this is
a new era for America,” I told the
assembled throng.
Behind the crowd in the lobby, I saw
etched into the marble walls the names
of more than two hundred diplomats who
had died while representing America
overseas, going back to the earliest
years of the republic. They had lost their
lives to wars, natural disasters, terrorist
attacks, epidemics, even shipwrecks. I
knew it was possible that in the years
ahead we’d lose more Americans on
duty in dangerous and fragile places.
(Sadly we did, from the earthquake in
Haiti to the terrorist attack in Benghazi,
Libya, and other places in between.)
That day and every day I resolved to do
everything I could to support and protect
the men and women who served our
country around the world.
The Secretary’s office is in the
seventh-floor suite known as “Mahogany
Row.” The hallway was lined with
imposing portraits of my predecessors. I
would be working under their watchful
gaze. Our warren of offices and
conference rooms was guarded by
Diplomatic Security Service officers
and routinely swept for listening
devices. It was called an SCIF
(Sensitive Compartmented Information
Facility) and could sometimes feel as
though we were working inside a giant
safe. To prevent eavesdropping, nobody
was allowed to bring in any outside
electronic devices, even a cell phone.
After greeting my team, I walked into
my private office and sat down at my
desk for the first time. A letter from my
predecessor, Secretary Rice, sat waiting
for me. The walls of this inner office
were paneled in the northern
cherrywood chosen by former Secretary
George Shultz, giving the small room a
cozy feel very different from the grand
outer office where I would receive
visitors. Three phones sat on the desk,
including direct lines to the White
House, Pentagon, and CIA. I added a
couch where I could read comfortably,
even nap occasionally, and in the
adjoining room there was a small
kitchen and bathroom, complete with a
shower.
Soon this office would become my
second home, where I would spend
many hours on the phone with foreign
leaders while I paced the small room.
But for now, on this first day, I just
soaked it up.
I picked up the letter from Condi and
opened it. It was brief, warm, and
heartfelt. She wrote that being Secretary
of State was “the best job in
government” and that she was confident
she was leaving the Department in good
hands. “You have the most important
qualification for this job—you love this
country deeply.” I was touched by her
words.
I couldn’t wait to get started.
PART TWO

Across the Pacific
3

Asia: The Pivot

My motorcade made its way through
the quiet streets of Andrews Air Force
Base on a bright Sunday in mid-February
2009. We rolled past guard booths,
homes, and hangars, and then out onto
the vast concrete expanse of the tarmac. I
was embarking on my first journey as
Secretary of State. The cars came to a
stop beside a blue and white U.S. Air
Force Boeing 757, fitted with enough
advanced communications gear to
coordinate global diplomacy from
anywhere in the world. Emblazoned on
the side, in large black letters, were the
words “United States of America.” I got
out of the car, paused, and took it all in.
As First Lady I had flown around the
world with Bill in Air Force One, the
largest and grandest of government jets. I
had also traveled extensively on my
own, usually in a 757 much like this one,
and on a variety of smaller planes as a
Senator participating in Congressional
delegations to places such as Iraq,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan. But none of
those experiences could prepare me for
what it would be like to spend more than
two thousand hours in the air over four
years, traveling nearly a million miles.
That’s eighty-seven full days of recycled
air and the steady vibration of twin
turbofan engines propelling us forward
at more than 500 miles per hour. This
plane was also a powerful symbol of the
nation I was honored to represent. No
matter how many miles we logged or
countries we visited, I never lost my
sense of pride at seeing those iconic
blue and white colors lit up on some faroff runway.
Inside the plane, to my left, Air Force
officers were busy in a cabin full of
computers and communications
equipment. Beyond them the pilots
performed their final checks. To the
right, a narrow hallway led to my
personal compartment, with a small
desk, a pullout couch, a bathroom and
closet, and secure and nonsecure phones.
Further on was the main cabin, which
was divided into three sections for staff,
security, and press and Air Force
personnel. In the first section were two
tables, each with four leather chairs
facing each other, as in some train
compartments. On one table, State
Department Foreign Service officers set
up a traveling office, linked to the
Operations Center back in Foggy Bottom
and capable of preparing everything
from classified cables to detailed daily
schedules, all at thirty thousand feet.
Across the aisle my senior staff set up
their laptops, worked the phones, or
tried to get a little sleep between stops.
The tables were usually covered with
thick briefing books and marked-up
speech drafts, but you’d often see copies
of People magazine and US Weekly
peeking out from underneath the official
papers.
The middle section of the plane
looked like a standard business-class
cabin on any domestic flight. The seats
were filled with policy experts from
relevant State Department bureaus,
colleagues from the White House and the
Pentagon, a translator, and several
Diplomatic Security agents. Next came
the press cabin, for the journalists and
camera crews who reported on our
journeys.
At the back were the Air Force flight
attendants who prepared our meals and
always took good care of us. That was
not easy when everyone’s food
preferences and sleep patterns were out
of sync most of the time. The flight crew
shopped for provisions in the countries
we visited, which allowed for some
unexpected treats, like Oaxaca cheese in
Mexico, smoked salmon in Ireland, and
tropical fruit in Cambodia. But wherever
we were, we could still count on finding
staff favorites on the menu, like the Air
Force’s famous turkey taco salad.
This packed metal tube became our
home in the sky. I told the staff to dress
casually, sleep as much as possible, and
do whatever they could to stay sane and
healthy amid the rigors of a grueling
schedule. Over those two thousand hours
in the air, we would celebrate birthdays,
see distinguished diplomats weeping
over soapy romantic comedies (and try
and fail not to tease them for it), and
marvel at Richard Holbrooke’s bright
yellow pajamas that he called his
“sleeping suit.”
On most flights the team carved out a
lot of work time, and so did I. But at the
end of a long international tour there was
a palpable sense of relief and relaxation
on the flight home. We’d enjoy a glass of
wine, watch movies, and swap stories.
On one of those flights we watched
Breach, a film about Robert Hanssen, an
FBI agent who spied for the Russians in
the 1980s and ’90s. In one scene the
Hanssen character complains, “Can’t
trust a woman in a pantsuit. Men wear
the pants. The world doesn’t need any
more Hillary Clintons.” The whole
plane burst into laughter.
The plane broke down on a number of
occasions. Once, stranded in Saudi
Arabia with mechanical difficulties, I
managed to hitch a ride home with
General David Petraeus, who happened
to be passing through the region. Dave
generously offered me his cabin and sat
with his staff. In the middle of the night
we stopped to refuel at an Air Force
base in Germany. Dave got off the plane
and headed right to the base’s gym,
where he worked out for an hour, and
then we were off and flying again.
On that first trip in February 2009, I
walked to the back of the plane, where
the journalists were settling into their
seats. Many had covered previous
Secretaries of State and were
reminiscing about past travels and
speculating about what they could expect
from this new Secretary.
Some of my advisors had suggested I
use my first trip to begin healing the
transatlantic rifts that opened up during
the Bush Administration by heading to
Europe. Others suggested Afghanistan,
where U.S. troops were battling a
difficult insurgency. Colin Powell’s first
stop had been Mexico, our nearest
southern neighbor, which also made a lot
of sense. Warren Christopher had gone
to the Middle East, which continued to
demand concentrated attention. But Jim
Steinberg, my new Deputy, suggested
Asia, where we expected much of the
history of the 21st century to be written.
I decided he was right, so I was
breaking with precedent and heading
first to Japan, then on to Indonesia, South
Korea, and finally China. We needed to
send a message to Asia and the world
that America was back.

By the time I became Secretary, I had
come to believe the United States had to
do more to help shape the future of Asia
and manage our increasingly complex
relationship with China. The trajectory
of the global economy and our own
prosperity, the advance of democracy
and human rights, and our hopes for a
21st century less bloody than the 20th all
hinged to a large degree on what
happened in the Asia-Pacific. This vast
region, from the Indian Ocean to the tiny
island nations of the Pacific, is home to
more than half the world’s population,
several of our most trusted allies and
valuable trading partners, and many of
the world’s most dynamic trade and
energy routes. U.S. exports to the region
helped spur our economic recovery in
the wake of the recession, and our future
growth depends on reaching further into
Asia’s expanding middle-class
consumer base. Asia is also the source
of real threats to our own security, most
notably from North Korea’s
unpredictable dictatorship.
The rise of China is one of the most
consequential strategic developments of
our time. It is a country full of
contradictions: an increasingly rich and
influential nation that has moved
hundreds of millions of people out of
poverty, and an authoritarian regime
trying to paper over its serious domestic
challenges, with around 100 million
people still living on a dollar or less a
day. It’s the world’s largest producer of
solar panels and also the largest emitter
of greenhouse gases, with some of the
world’s worst urban air pollution. Eager
to play a major role on the global stage
but determined to act unilaterally in
dealing with its neighbors, China
remains reluctant to question other
nations’ internal affairs, even in extreme
circumstances.
As a Senator, I argued that the United
States would have to deal with a rising
China and its growing economic,
diplomatic, and military power in a
careful, disciplined way. In the past, the
emergence of new powers has rarely
come without friction. In this case the
situation was particularly complicated
because of how interdependent our
economies were becoming. In 2007,
trade between the United States and
China surpassed $387 billion; in 2013, it
reached $562 billion. The Chinese held
vast amounts of U.S. Treasury bonds,
which meant we were deeply invested in
each other’s economic success. As a
consequence, we both shared a strong
interest in maintaining stability in Asia
and around the world and in ensuring the
steady flow of energy and trade. Yet
beyond these shared interests, our values
and worldviews often diverged; we saw
it in old flash points like North Korea,
Taiwan, Tibet, and human rights, and
newly important ones such as climate
change and disputes in the South and
East China Seas.
All this made for a difficult balancing
act. We needed a sophisticated strategy
that encouraged China to participate as a
responsible member of the international
community, while standing firm in
defense of our values and interests. This
was a theme I carried through my
campaign for President in 2008, arguing
that the United States had to know both
how to find common ground and how to
stand our ground. I emphasized the
importance of convincing China to play
by the rules in the global marketplace by
dropping discriminatory trade practices,
allowing the value of its currency to
rise, and preventing tainted food and
goods from reaching consumers around
the world, such as the toys contaminated
by toxic lead paint that had ended up in
the hands of American children. The
world needed responsible leadership
from China to make real headway on
climate change, to prevent conflict on the
Korean Peninsula, and to address many
other regional and global challenges, so
it wasn’t in our interests to turn Beijing
into a new Cold War boogeyman.
Instead we needed to find a formula to
manage competition and foster
cooperation.
Under the leadership of Treasury
Secretary Hank Paulson, the Bush
Administration started a high-level
economic dialogue with China that made
progress on some important trade issues,
but these talks remained separate from
broader strategic and security
discussions. Many in the region felt that
the administration’s focus on Iraq,
Afghanistan, and the Middle East led to
disengagement from America’s
traditional leadership role in Asia. Some
of those concerns were overstated, but
the perception was a problem in and of
itself. I thought we ought to broaden our
engagement with China and put the AsiaPacific at the top of our diplomatic
agenda.
Jim Steinberg and I quickly agreed
that the person who should run the State
Department’s Bureau of East Asian and
Pacific Affairs was Dr. Kurt Campbell.
Kurt, who helped shape Asia policy at
the Pentagon and the National Security
Council during the Clinton
Administration, became a key architect
of our strategy. Besides being a creative
strategic thinker and devoted public
servant, he was also an irrepressible
traveling companion, fond of pranks and
never without a joke or a story.
During my first days on the job, I
made a round of calls to key Asian
leaders. One of my more candid
exchanges was with Foreign Minister
Stephen Smith of Australia. His boss,
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, spoke
Mandarin and had a clear-eyed view of
the opportunities and challenges of
China’s rise. Rich in natural resources,
Australia was profiting by supplying
China’s industrial boom with minerals
and other raw materials. China became
Australia’s largest trading partner,
surpassing Japan and the United States.
But Rudd also understood that peace and
security in the Pacific depended on
American leadership, and he put great
value on the historic ties between our
countries. The last thing he wanted was
to see America withdraw from or lose
influence in Asia. In that first call, Smith
expressed his and Rudd’s hope that the
Obama Administration would “more
deeply engage with Asia.” I told him that
was right in line with my own thinking
and that I looked forward to a close
partnership. Australia became a key ally
in our Asian strategy over the coming
years, under both Rudd and his
successor, Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Its neighbor New Zealand presented
more of a challenge. For twenty-five
years, since New Zealand prohibited all
nuclear vessels from visiting their home
ports, the United States and New
Zealand had had a limited relationship.
However, I thought our long friendship
and mutual interests created a diplomatic
opening for bridging the divide and
shaping a new relationship between
Wellington and Washington. On my visit
in 2010, I signed the Wellington
Declaration with Prime Minister John
Key, which committed our nations to
work more closely together in Asia, the
Pacific, and multilateral organizations.
In 2012, Secretary of Defense Leon
Panetta would rescind the twenty-six-
year ban on New Zealand’s ships
docking at American bases. In global
politics, sometimes reaching out to an
old friend can be as rewarding as
making a new one.
All my calls with Asian leaders that
first week reinforced my belief that we
needed a new approach in the region.
Jim and I consulted with experts about
various possibilities. One option was to
focus on broadening our relationship
with China, on the theory that if we
could get our China policy right, the rest
of our work in Asia would be much
easier. An alternative was to concentrate
our efforts on strengthening America’s
treaty alliances in the region (with
Japan, South Korea, Thailand, the
Philippines, and Australia), providing a
counterbalance to China’s growing
power.
A third approach was to elevate and
harmonize the alphabet soup of regional
multilateral organizations, such as
ASEAN (the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations) and APEC (the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation
organization). Nobody was expecting
anything as coherent as the European
Union to spring up overnight, but other
regions had learned important lessons
about the value of well-organized
multinational institutions. They could
provide a venue for every nation and
point of view to be heard and offer
opportunities for nations to work
together on shared challenges, resolve
their disagreements, establish rules and
standards of behavior, reward
responsible countries with legitimacy
and respect, and help hold accountable
those who violated the rules. If Asia’s
multilateral institutions were supported
and modernized, they could strengthen
regional norms on everything from
intellectual property rights to nuclear
proliferation to freedom of navigation,
and mobilize action on challenges like
climate change and piracy. This kind of
methodical multilateral diplomacy is
often slow and frustrating, rarely making
headlines at home, but it can pay real
dividends that affect the lives of millions
of people.
In keeping with the position I had
staked out as a Senator and Presidential
candidate, I decided that the smart
power choice was to meld all three
approaches. We would show that
America was “all in” when it came to
Asia. I was prepared to lead the way,
but success would require buy-in from
our entire government, beginning with
the White House.
The President shared my
determination to make Asia a focal point
of the administration’s foreign policy.
Born in Hawaii, and having spent
formative years in Indonesia, he felt a
strong personal connection to the region
and understood its significance. At his
direction, the National Security Council
staff, led by General Jim Jones, along
with Tom Donilon and their Asia expert,
Jeff Bader, supported our strategy. Over
the next four years we practiced what I
called “forward-deployed diplomacy”
in Asia, borrowing a term from our
military colleagues. We quickened the
pace and widened the scope of our
diplomatic engagement across the
region, dispatching senior officials and
development experts far and wide,
participating more fully in multilateral
organizations, reaffirming our traditional
alliances, and reaching out to new
strategic partners. Because personal
relationships and gestures of respect are
deeply significant in Asia, I made it a
priority to visit almost every nation in
the region. My travels would eventually
take me from one of the smallest Pacific
islands to the home of a long-imprisoned
Nobel Peace laureate to the edge of the
most heavily guarded border in the
world.
Over four years, I delivered a series
of speeches explaining our strategy and
making the case for why the Asia-Pacific
deserved greater attention from the U.S.
government. In the summer of 2011, I
began working on a long essay that
would situate our work in the region in
the broader sweep of American foreign
policy. The war in Iraq was winding
down, and a transition was under way in
Afghanistan. After a decade of focusing
on the areas of greatest threat, we had
come to a “pivot point.” Of course, we
had to stay focused on the threats that
remained, but it was also time to do
more in the areas of greatest opportunity.
Foreign Policy magazine published
my essay in the fall under the title
“America’s Pacific Century,” but it was
the word pivot that gained prominence.
Journalists latched on to it as an
evocative description of the
administration’s renewed emphasis on
Asia, although many in our own
government preferred the more anodyne
rebalance to Asia. Some friends and
allies in other parts of the world were
understandably concerned that the phrase
implied turning our back on them, but we
worked to make clear that America had
the reach and resolve to pivot to Asia
without pivoting away from other
obligations and opportunities.

Our first task was to reassert America as
a Pacific power without sparking an
unnecessary confrontation with China.
That’s why I decided to use my first trip
as Secretary to accomplish three goals:
visit our key Asian allies, Japan and
South Korea; reach out to Indonesia, an
emerging regional power and the home
of ASEAN; and begin our crucial
engagement with China.
In early February, shortly after I took
office, I invited a number of academics
and Asia experts to dinner at the State
Department. We ate in the elegant
Thomas Jefferson State Reception Room
on the ceremonial eighth floor. Painted
robin’s egg blue and furnished with
Early American Chippendale antiques, it
became one of my favorite rooms in the
building, and over the years I hosted
many meals and events there. We talked
about how to balance America’s
interests in Asia, which sometimes
seemed in competition. For example,
how hard could we push the Chinese on
human rights or climate change and still
gain their support on security issues like
Iran and North Korea? Stapleton Roy, a
former Ambassador to Singapore,
Indonesia, and China, urged me not to
overlook Southeast Asia, which Jim and
Kurt had also been recommending. Over
the years American attention has often
focused on Northeast Asia because of
our alliances and troop commitments in
Japan and South Korea, but countries
like Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam
were growing in economic and strategic
importance. Roy and other experts
backed our plan to sign a treaty with
ASEAN, which would then open the
door to much greater U.S. engagement
there. It seemed like a small step that
could yield real benefits down the road.
A week later I went to the Asia
Society in New York to deliver my first
major address as Secretary on our
approach to the Asia-Pacific. Orville
Schell, the Asia Society’s silver-haired
China scholar, suggested I use an ancient
proverb from Sun Tzu’s The Art of War
about soldiers from two warring feudal
states who find themselves on a boat
together crossing a wide river in a
storm. Instead of fighting, they work
together and survive. In English the
proverb roughly translates as, “When
you are in a common boat, cross the
river peacefully together.” For the
United States and China, with our
economic destinies bound up together in
the middle of a global financial storm,
this was good advice. My use of the
proverb was not lost on Beijing. Premier
Wen Jiabao and other leaders referenced
it in later discussions with me. A few
days after the speech, I boarded the
plane at Andrews Air Force Base and
headed out across the Pacific.
Over many years of travel I’ve
developed the ability to sleep almost
anywhere at any time—on planes, in
cars, a quick power nap in a hotel room
before a meeting. On the road I tried to
grab sleep whenever possible since I
was never sure when my next proper rest
would be. When I had to stay awake
during meetings or conference calls, I
drank copious cups of coffee and tea,
and sometimes dug the fingernails of one
hand into the palm of the other. It was
the only way I knew to cope with the
crazy schedule and fierce jet lag. But as
our plane headed across the international
date line toward Tokyo, I knew there
was no hope of sleep. I couldn’t stop
thinking about what I had to do to make
the most of the trip.
I first visited Japan with Bill as part
of a trade delegation from Arkansas
during his governorship. The country
then was a key ally but also an object of
growing anxiety in the United States.
Japan’s “Economic Miracle” came to
symbolize deep-seated fears about U.S.
stagnation and decline, much as China’s
rise has in the 21st century. The cover of
Paul Kennedy’s 1987 book The Rise and
Fall of the Great Powers featured a
weary Uncle Sam stepping off a global
pedestal with a determined-looking
Japanese businessman scrambling up
behind him. Sound familiar? When a
Japanese conglomerate purchased the
historic Rockefeller Center in New York
in 1989, it caused a minor panic in the
press. “America for Sale?” asked the
Chicago Tribune.
In those days there were legitimate
concerns about America’s economic
future, which helped fuel Bill’s
successful Presidential campaign in
1992. Yet by the time Emperor Akihito
and Empress Michiko of Japan
welcomed Bill and me to Tokyo’s
Imperial Palace in the summer of 1993,
we could already see that America was
regaining its economic strength. Japan,
by contrast, faced a “Lost Decade” after
its asset and credit bubble burst, leaving
banks and other businesses loaded down
with bad debt. Its economy, once feared
by Americans, slowed to an anemic pace
—which caused a whole different set of
concerns for them and us. Japan was still
one of the largest economies in the
world and a key partner in responding to
the global financial crisis. I chose Tokyo
as my first destination to underscore that
our new administration saw the alliance
as a cornerstone of our strategy in the
region. President Obama would also
welcome Prime Minister Taro Aso to
Washington later that month, the first
foreign leader to meet with him in the
Oval Office.
The strength of our alliance would be
demonstrated dramatically in March
2011, when a 9.0-magnitude earthquake
hit the east coast of Japan, setting off a
tsunami with hundred-foot waves and
leading to a meltdown at the Fukushima
nuclear plant. The “Triple Disaster”
killed nearly twenty thousand people,
displaced hundreds of thousands more,
and became one of the most expensive
natural catastrophes in history. Our
embassy and the U.S. 7th Fleet, which
had a long, close partnership with the
Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force,
jumped quickly into action, working
with the Japanese to deliver food and
medical supplies, conduct search-andrescue missions, evacuate the injured,
and assist with other vital missions. It
was called Operation Tomodachi, the
Japanese word for “friend.”
On this first visit, I landed in Tokyo
amid a rush of pomp and pageantry. In
addition to the normal retinue of official
greeters, two women astronauts and
members of Japan’s Special Olympics
team were at the airport to meet me.
After a few hours of sleep at Tokyo’s
historic Hotel Okura, a pocket of 1960sera style and culture, straight out of Mad
Men, my first stop was a tour of the
historic Meiji Shrine. The rest of my
whirlwind day featured a get-to-knowyou with staff and families at the U.S.
Embassy, lunch with the Foreign
Minister, a heart-rending meeting with
families of Japanese citizens abducted
by North Korea, a lively town hall
discussion with students at the
University of Tokyo, interviews with
American and Japanese press, dinner
with the Prime Minister, and a late-night
meeting with the head of the opposition
party. It was the first of many jampacked days over four years, each one
full of diplomatic and emotional highs
and lows.
One of the highlights was going to the
Imperial Palace to see Empress Michiko
again. It was a rare honor, a result of the
warm personal relationship she and I
had enjoyed since my time as First Lady.
We greeted each other with a smile and
a hug. Then she welcomed me into her
private quarters. The Emperor joined us
for tea and a conversation about my
travels and theirs.
Planning a complicated foreign trip like
this takes a whole team of talented
people. Huma, by now Deputy Chief of
Staff for Operations, and my director of
scheduling, Lona Valmoro, who juggled
a million invitations without ever
missing a beat, coordinated a wideranging process to make sure we
collected the best ideas for stops and
events. I made it clear that I wanted to
get out beyond the Foreign Ministries
and palaces and meet with citizens,
especially community activists and
volunteers; journalists; students and
professors; business, labor, and
religious leaders, the civil society that
helps hold governments accountable and
drives social change. This was
something I had been doing since I was
First Lady. In a speech at the 1998
World Economic Forum in Davos,
Switzerland, I had compared a healthy
society to a three-legged stool,
supported by a responsible government,
an open economy, and a vibrant civil
society. That third leg of the stool was
too often neglected.
Thanks to the internet, especially
social media, citizens and community
organizations had gained more access to
information and a greater ability to
speak out than ever before. Now even
autocracies had to pay attention to the
sentiments of their people, as we would
see during the Arab Spring. For the
United States, it was important to build
strong relationships with foreign publics
as well as governments. This would help
ensure more durable partnerships with
our friends. It would also build support
for our goals and values when the
government wasn’t with us but the
people were. In many cases civil society
advocates and organizations were the
ones driving progress inside countries.
They were battling official corruption,
mobilizing grassroots movements, and
drawing attention to problems like
environmental degradation, human rights
abuses, and economic inequality. From
the start I wanted America to be firmly
on their side and to encourage and
support them in their efforts.
My first town hall meeting was at the
University of Tokyo. I told the students
that America was ready to listen again
and turned the floor over to them. They
responded with a torrent of questions,
and not just about the issues that were
dominating the headlines, like the future
of the U.S.-Japan alliance and the
ongoing global financial crisis. They
also asked about the prospects for
democracy in Burma, the safety of
nuclear power (presciently), tensions
with the Muslim world, climate change,
and how to succeed as a woman in a
male-dominated society. It was the first
of many town hall meetings I’d have
with young people around the world, and
I loved hearing their thoughts and
engaging in a substantive back-and-forth
discussion. Years later I heard that the
president of the university’s daughter
had sat in the audience that day and
decided she too wanted to become a
diplomat. She went on to join Japan’s
Foreign Service.
A few days later, at Ewha Womans
University in Seoul, South Korea, I saw
how reaching out to young people was
going to take me into territory well
beyond traditional foreign policy
concerns. As I stepped onto the stage at
Ewha, the audience erupted in cheers.
Then the young women lined up at the
microphones to ask me some highly
personal questions—respectfully, but
eagerly.
Is it difficult to deal with misogynistic
leaders around the world?
I responded that I would guess that
many leaders choose to ignore the fact
that they’re dealing with a woman when
they’re dealing with me. But I try not to
let them get away with that.
(Nonetheless, it is an unfortunate reality
that women in public life still face an
unfair double standard. Even leaders
like former Prime Minister Julia Gillard
of Australia have faced outrageous
sexism, which shouldn’t be tolerated in
any country.)
Could you tell us about your daughter,
Chelsea?
I could spend hours on that question.
But suffice it to say, she’s an amazing
person and I’m so proud of her.
How do you describe love?
On that one, I laughed and said that I
now officially felt more like an advice
columnist than Secretary of State. I
thought for a moment and then said,
“How does anybody describe love? I
mean, poets have spent millennia writing
about love. Psychologists and authors of
all sorts write about it. I think if you can
describe it, you may not fully be
experiencing it because it is such a
personal relationship. I’m very lucky
because my husband is my best friend,
and he and I have been together for a
very long time, longer than most of you
have been alive.”
It seemed that these women felt
connected to me in a personal way, and,
wonderfully, they were comfortable and
confident enough to talk to me as though
I was a friend or mentor rather than a
government official from a faraway
country. I wanted to be worthy of their
admiration. I also hoped that by having a
conversation like this, person to person,
I could reach across cultural gaps and
perhaps convince them to give America
a second look.
After Japan it was on to Jakarta,
Indonesia, where I was welcomed by a
group of young students from the primary
school that President Obama attended as
a young boy. During my visit, I went on
The Awesome Show, one of the country’s
most popular television programs. It felt
just like MTV. Loud music blared
between segments, and the interviewers
all looked young enough to be in school,
not hosting a national talk show.
They asked me a question that I would
hear all over the world: How could I
work with President Obama after we
had campaigned so hard against each
other? Indonesia was still a very young
democracy; the longtime ruler, Suharto,
was ousted in 1998 through popular
protests, and the first direct Presidential
election was held only in 2004. So it
was not surprising that people were
more accustomed to political rivals
being jailed or exiled rather than
appointed chief diplomat. I said that it
had not been easy losing a hard-fought
campaign to President Obama but that
democracy works only if political
leaders put the common good ahead of
personal interest. I told them that when
he asked me to serve, I accepted because
we both love our country. It was the first
of many times that our partnership would
serve as an example for people in other
countries trying to understand
democracy.
The night before, over dinner with
civil society leaders at the National
Archives Museum in Jakarta, we
discussed the extraordinary challenges
the leaders and people of Indonesia had
taken on: blending democracy, Islam,
modernity, and women’s rights in a
country with the largest Muslim
population in the world. In the previous
half-century Indonesia had been a
relatively minor player in the region’s
political affairs. When I visited as First
Lady fifteen years earlier, it was still a
poor and undemocratic country. By 2009
it was being transformed under the
forward-looking leadership of President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Economic
growth had lifted many people out of
poverty, and Indonesia was working to
share lessons from its own transition
away from dictatorship with other
countries across Asia.
I was impressed by Yudhoyono, who
had a deep grasp of regional diplomatic
dynamics and a vision for his country’s
continued development. In our first
conversation he encouraged me to
pursue a new approach toward Burma,
which had been ruled by a repressive
military junta for years. Yudhoyono had
met twice with Burma’s top general, the
reclusive Than Shwe, and he told me
that the junta might be willing to inch
toward democracy if America and the
international community helped them
along. I listened carefully to
Yudhoyono’s wise advice, and we
stayed in close touch about Burma going
forward. Our engagement with that
country eventually became one of the
most exciting developments of my time
as Secretary.
Jakarta was also the permanent home
of ASEAN, the regional institution that
the Asia hands back in D.C. had urged
me to prioritize. In an interview in
Tokyo, a Japanese reporter noted the
widespread disappointment among
Southeast Asians that American officials
had skipped recent ASEAN conferences,
which some saw as a sign of America’s
flagging presence in the Asia-Pacific,
even as China was seeking to expand its
influence. The reporter wanted to know
whether I was planning to continue this
trend, or if I would work to reinvigorate
our engagement. It was a question that
spoke to the hunger in Asia for tangible
signs of U.S. leadership. I replied that
expanding relations with organizations
such as ASEAN was an important part
of our strategy in the region, and I
planned to attend as many meetings as
possible. If we were going to improve
our position in Southeast Asia, as China
was also trying to do, and encourage
nations to agree to cooperate more on
trade, security, and the environment, then
a good place to start would be with
ASEAN.
No previous U.S. Secretary of State
had ever visited the organization’s
headquarters. ASEAN SecretaryGeneral Surin Pitsuwan met me with a
bouquet of yellow roses and explained
that Indonesians consider the color
yellow a symbol of hope and new
beginnings. “Your visit shows the
seriousness of the United States to end
its diplomatic absenteeism in the
region,” he said. That was a rather
pointed greeting, but he was right about
our intentions.

The next stop was South Korea, a
wealthy, advanced democracy and key
ally living in the shadow of a repressive
and bellicose neighbor to the north.
American troops have been on watchful
guard there ever since the end of the
Korean War in 1953. In my meetings
with President Lee Myung-bak and other
senior officials, I reassured them that
although the administration in the United
States had changed, our nation’s
commitment to South Korea’s defense
had not.
North Korea, by contrast, is the most
tightly closed totalitarian state in the
world. Many of its nearly 25 million
people live in abject poverty. The
political oppression is nearly total.
Famine is frequent. Yet the regime, led
in the early years of the Obama
Administration by the aging and
eccentric Kim Jong Il, and later by his
young son Kim Jong Un, devotes most of
its limited resources to supporting its
military, developing nuclear weapons,
and antagonizing its neighbors.
In 1994, the Clinton Administration
negotiated an agreement with North
Korea in which it pledged to halt
operation and construction of facilities
widely suspected of being part of a
secret nuclear weapons program in
exchange for assistance in building two
smaller nuclear reactors that would
produce energy, not weapons-grade
plutonium. The agreement also provided
a path to normalize relations between
our two countries. By September 1999, a
deal was reached with North Korea to
freeze testing of its long-range missiles.
In October 2000, Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright visited North Korea
in an effort to test the regime’s intentions
and negotiate another agreement on
continued inspections. Unfortunately,
while the North Koreans made a lot of
promises, a comprehensive agreement
never materialized. Once President
George W. Bush took office, he quickly
altered policy and referred to North
Korea as part of the “Axis of Evil” in
his 2002 State of the Union address.
Evidence emerged that North Korea had
secretly enriched uranium, and in 2003,
it restarted enrichment of plutonium. By
the end of the Bush Administration,
Pyongyang had constructed a number of
nuclear weapons that could threaten
South Korea and the region.
In my public remarks in Seoul I
extended an invitation to the North
Koreans. If they would completely and
verifiably eliminate their nuclear
weapons program, the Obama
Administration would be willing to
normalize relations, replace the
peninsula’s long-standing armistice
agreement with a permanent peace
treaty, and assist in meeting the energy
and other economic and humanitarian
needs of the North Korean people. If not,
the regime’s isolation would continue. It
was an opening gambit in a drama I was
sure would continue for our entire term,
as it had for decades before, and not one
I thought likely to succeed. But, as with
Iran, another regime with nuclear
ambitions, we started off with the offer
of engagement hoping it would succeed
and knowing it would be easier to get
other nations to pressure North Korea if
and when the offer was rejected. It was
particularly important for China, a
longtime patron and protector of the
regime in Pyongyang, to be part of a
united international front.
It didn’t take long to get an answer.
The next month, March 2009, a crew
of American television journalists were
reporting from the border between China
and North Korea for Current TV, the
network cofounded by former Vice
President Al Gore and later sold to Al
Jazeera. The journalists were there to
document the stories of North Korean
women who were trafficked across the
border and forced into the sex trade and
other forms of modern slavery. At dawn
on March 17, a local guide led the
Americans along the Tumen River that
separates the two countries, still frozen
in the early spring. They followed him
out onto the ice and, briefly, as far as the
North Korean side of the river.
According to the journalists, they then
returned to Chinese soil. Suddenly North
Korean border guards appeared with
guns drawn. The Americans ran, and the
producer escaped along with the guide.
But the two women reporters, Euna Lee
and Laura Ling, were not so lucky. They
were arrested and dragged back across
the river to North Korea, where they
were sentenced to twelve years of hard
labor.
Two months later North Korea
performed an underground nuclear test
and announced that it no longer
considered itself bound by the terms of
the 1953 armistice. Just as President
Obama had promised in his inaugural
address, we had offered an open hand,
but North Korea was responding with a
closed fist.
Our first step was to see if action was
possible at the United Nations. Working
closely with Ambassador Susan Rice in
New York, I spent hours on the phone
with leaders in Beijing, Moscow,
Tokyo, and other capitals drumming up
support for a strong resolution imposing
sanctions on the regime in Pyongyang.
Everyone agreed that the nuclear test
was unacceptable, but what to do about
it was another story.
“I know this is difficult for your
government,” I told Chinese Foreign
Minister Yang Jiechi in one call, “[but]
if we act together, we have a chance to
change North Korea’s calculation about
the cost to them of continuing with their
nuclear and missile programs.” Yang
said China shared our concerns about a
regional arms race and agreed that “an
appropriate and measured” response
was needed. I hoped that wasn’t code
for “toothless.”
By mid-June, our efforts paid off. All
the members of the UN Security Council
agreed to impose additional sanctions.
We had to make some concessions to get
Chinese and Russian backing, but this
was still the toughest measure ever
imposed on North Korea, and I was
pleased we were finally able to muster a
unified international response.
But how to help the imprisoned
journalists? We heard that Kim Jong Il
would let the women go only if he
received a personal visit and request
from a high-ranking U.S. delegation. I
discussed this with President Obama and
other members of the national security
team. What if Al Gore himself went? Or
maybe former President Jimmy Carter,
known for his humanitarian work around
the globe? Maybe Madeleine Albright,
who had unique experience in North
Korea from her diplomacy in the 1990s?
But the North Koreans already had a
particular visitor in mind: my husband,
Bill. It was a surprising request. On the
one hand, the North Korean government
was busy hurling absurd invectives at
me over the nuclear issue, including
calling me “a funny lady.” (North
Korea’s propaganda operation is famous
for its over-the-top and often
nonsensical rhetorical attacks. They
once called Vice President Biden an
“impudent burglar.” There’s even a
“random insult generator” on the internet
that churns out parodies of their
broadsides.) On the other hand, Kim
apparently had had a soft spot for my
husband ever since Bill sent a
condolence letter after the death of his
father Kim Il-sung in 1994. And of
course he also wanted the global
attention that would come from a rescue
mission led by a former President.
I talked with Bill about the idea. He
was willing to go if it would secure the
freedom of the two reporters. Al Gore
and the families of the women also
encouraged Bill to take the mission. But
more than a few people in the White
House argued against the trip. Some may
have harbored negative feelings toward
Bill from the 2008 primary campaign,
but most were simply reluctant to
reward Kim’s bad behavior with such a
high-profile trip and potentially create
concerns for our allies. They had a good
point: we had to balance doing what was
necessary to rescue the two innocent
American civilians with avoiding
potential geopolitical fallout.
I thought it was worth trying. The
North Koreans had already gotten all the
mileage they could from the incident, but
they needed some reason to justify
letting the women go home. Also, if we
didn’t do something to try to resolve the
matter, our efforts on everything else
with North Korea would be suspended
because of their imprisonment. When I
raised the idea directly with President
Obama over lunch in late July, he agreed
with me that it was the best chance we
had.
Although it was considered a “private
mission,” Bill and the small team he
would take along were well briefed
before departing. A humorous but
important part of the preparation
involved coaching them not to be smiling
(or frowning) when the inevitable
official photos with Kim were taken.
In early August, Bill set out on his
mission. After twenty hours on the
ground in North Korea and a face-toface meeting with Kim, he succeeded in
winning the journalists’ immediate
release. They flew home with Bill to a
dramatic arrival in California, greeted
by family, friends, and loads of
television cameras. The official images
released by the regime were
appropriately stilted; no smiling by any
of the Americans. Afterward Bill joked
that he felt like he was auditioning for a
James Bond movie. But he believed that
his success was proof that the insular
regime would respond positively, at
least on certain points, if we could find
the right mix of incentives.
Unfortunately there was more trouble
ahead. Late one evening in March 2010,
a South Korean naval vessel, the
Cheonan, was cruising near North
Korean waters. It was a cold night, and
most of the 104 South Korean sailors
were belowdecks sleeping, eating, or
exercising. With no warning, a torpedo
fired from an unknown source detonated
below the Cheonan’s hull. The
explosion ripped the ship apart, and its
remains began to sink into the Yellow
Sea. Forty-six sailors died. In May, a
team of UN investigators concluded that
a North Korean midget submarine was
likely responsible for the unprovoked
attack. This time, while the Security
Council unanimously condemned the
attack, China blocked the naming of
North Korea directly or a more robust
response. Here was one of China’s
contradictions in full view. Beijing
claimed to prize stability above all else,
yet it was tacitly condoning naked
aggression that was profoundly
destabilizing.
In July 2010, Bob Gates and I
returned to South Korea together to meet
with our counterparts and demonstrate to
Pyongyang that the United States
continued to stand firmly behind our
allies. We drove out to Panmunjom, in
the demilitarized zone (DMZ) that has
divided North and South Korea since
1953. The DMZ is two and a half miles
wide and follows the 38th parallel
across the entire peninsula. It is the most
heavily fortified and mined border in the
world, and one of the most dangerous.
Under an ominous sky we climbed up to
a camouflaged observation point below
a guard tower and the flags of the United
States, the United Nations, and the
Republic of Korea. A light rain fell as
we stood behind sandbags and looked
through binoculars into North Korean
territory.
As I stared across the DMZ, it was
hard not to be struck anew by how this
narrow line separated two dramatically
different worlds. South Korea was a
shining example of progress, a country
that had successfully transitioned from
poverty and dictatorship to prosperity
and democracy. Its leaders cared about
the well-being of their citizens, and
young people grew up with freedom and
opportunity, not to mention the fastest
broadband download speeds in the
world. Just two and a half miles away,
North Korea was a land of fear and
famine. The contrast could not have been
starker, or more tragic.
Bob and I went inside the nearby
headquarters of the UN forces with our
South Korean counterparts for a military
briefing. We also toured a building that
sits squarely on top of the border, half in
the north and half in the south, designed
to facilitate negotiations between the
two sides. There is even a long
conference table positioned exactly on
the dividing line. As we walked through,
a North Korean soldier stood just inches
away, on the other side of a window,
staring stonily at us. Maybe he was just
curious. But if his goal was to
intimidate, he failed. I stayed focused on
our briefer, while Bob smiled merrily. A
photographer captured the unusual
moment in a picture that ran on the front
page of the New York Times.
In our meetings with the South
Koreans, Bob and I discussed steps we
could take to put pressure on the North
and discourage it from further
provocative actions. We agreed to make
a strong show of force to reassure our
friends and make clear that the United
States would protect regional security.
We announced new sanctions and that
the aircraft carrier USS George
Washington would move into position
off the Korean coast and join military
exercises with the South Korean Navy.
In all, eighteen ships, some two hundred
aircraft, and about eight thousand U.S.
and South Korean troops would
participate over four days. There was
outrage in both Pyongyang and Beijing
about the naval drills, which told us our
message had been received.
That evening, South Korean President
Lee Myung-bak hosted a dinner for Bob
and me at the Blue House, his official
residence. He thanked us for standing
beside South Korea in its hour of need,
and as he often did, he connected his
own rise from an impoverished
childhood to that of his country. South
Korea had once been poorer than North
Korea, but with the help of the United
States and the international community it
had succeeded in developing its
economy—a reminder of the legacy of
American leadership in Asia.

Another aspect of our pivot strategy was
bringing India more fully into the AsianPacific political scene. Having another
large democracy with a full seat at the
table in the region could help encourage
more countries to move toward political
and economic openness, rather than
follow China’s example of autocratic
state capitalism.
I had fond memories of my first visit
to India in 1995, with Chelsea by my
side. We toured one of the orphanages
run by Mother Teresa, the humble
Catholic nun whose charity and
saintliness made her a global icon. The
orphanage was filled with baby girls
who had been abandoned in the streets
or left at the front door for the nuns to
find; because they were not boys, they
were not valued by their families. Our
visit had prompted the local government
to pave the dirt road leading up to the
orphanage, which the nuns considered a
minor miracle. When Mother Teresa
died in 1997, I led an American
delegation to her funeral in Kolkata to
pay our respects to her remarkable
humanitarian legacy. Her open casket
was carried through the crowded streets,
and Presidents, Prime Ministers, and
religious leaders from many faiths
placed wreaths of white flowers on the
funeral bier. Later her successor invited
me to a private meeting at the
headquarters of their order,
Missionaries of Charity. In a simple
whitewashed room, lit only by tiers of
flickering devotional candles, the nuns
stood in a circle of quiet prayer
surrounding the closed casket, which had
been brought back there as its final
resting place. To my surprise, they asked
me to offer a prayer of my own. I
hesitated, then bowed my head and
thanked God for the privilege of having
known this tiny, forceful, saintly woman
during her time here on earth.
My first trip to India as Secretary of
State was in the summer of 2009. In the
fourteen years since I had first visited,
trade between our countries had risen
from less than $10 billion to more than
$60 billion, and would continue to grow
to nearly $100 billion in 2012. There
were still too many barriers and
restrictions, but American companies
were slowly gaining access to Indian
markets, creating jobs and opportunities
for people in both countries. Indian
companies were also investing in the
United States, and lots of high-skilled
Indian workers were applying for visas
and helping jump-start innovative
American businesses. More than
100,000 Indian students studied in the
United States every year; some went
home to put their skills to work in their
own country, while many stayed to
contribute to the American economy.
In New Delhi I met with a broad
cross-section of society, including Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh, business
leaders, women entrepreneurs, climate
and energy scientists, and students. I was
happy to see Sonia Gandhi, the head of
the Indian National Congress Party,
whom I had gotten to know during the
1990s. She and Prime Minister Singh
explained how hard it had been to show
restraint toward Pakistan after the
coordinated terrorist bombings in
Mumbai the prior November. They made
it clear to me that there would not be
such restraint in the event of a second
attack. Indians referred to the attack on
November 26, 2008, as 26/11, in an
echo of our own 9/11. In a show of
solidarity with the people of India, I
chose to stay at the elegant old Taj
Mahal Palace Hotel in Mumbai, which
had been one of the sites of the gruesome
attack that killed 164 people, including
138 Indians and four Americans. By
staying there and paying my respects at
the memorial, I wanted to send the
message that Mumbai was undeterred
and open for business.
In July 2011, in sweltering summer
heat, I traveled to the Indian port city of
Chennai on the Bay of Bengal, a
commercial hub that looks out toward
the vibrant trade and energy routes of
Southeast Asia. No Secretary of State
had ever visited this city before, but I
wanted to show that we understood India
was more than Delhi and Mumbai. In
Chennai’s public library, the largest in
the country, I spoke about India’s role on
the world stage, especially in the AsiaPacific region. India has ancient ties in
Southeast Asia, from the traders who
sailed the Straits of Malacca to the
Hindu temples that dot the region. Our
hope, I said, was that India would
transcend its intractable conflict with
Pakistan and become a more active
advocate for democracy and free-market
values across Asia. As I told the
audience in Chennai, the United States
supported India’s “Look East” policy.
We wanted it to “lead east” as well.
Despite some day-to-day differences,
the strategic fundamentals of our
relationship with India—shared
democratic values, economic
imperatives, and diplomatic priorities—
were pushing both countries’ interests
into closer convergence. We were
entering a new, more mature phase in
our relationship.
A major goal of our strategy in Asia was
to promote political reform as well as
economic growth. We wanted to make
the 21st century a time in which people
across Asia become not only more
prosperous but also more free. And
more freedom would, I was confident,
spur greater prosperity.
Many countries in the region were
grappling with the question of which
model of governance best suited their
society and circumstances. China’s rise,
and its mix of authoritarianism and state
capitalism, offered an attractive example
to some leaders. We often heard that
while democracy might work well
elsewhere in the world, it wasn’t at
home in Asia. These critics suggested
that it was unsuited to the region’s
history, maybe even antithetical to Asian
values.
There were plenty of counterexamples
to disprove these theories. Japan,
Malaysia, South Korea, Indonesia, and
Taiwan were all democratic societies
that had delivered tremendous economic
benefits to their people. From 2008 to
2012, Asia was the only region in the
world to achieve steady gains in
political rights and civil liberties,
according to the nongovernmental
organization Freedom House. For
example, the Philippines held elections
in 2010 that were widely praised as a
significant improvement over previous
ones, and the new President, Benigno
Aquino III, launched a concerted effort
to fight corruption and increase
transparency. The Philippines were a
valued ally for the United States, and
when a terrible typhoon hit the country in
late 2013, our partnership would ensure
that joint relief efforts led by the U.S.
Navy swung quickly into action. And, of
course, there was Burma. By mid-2012
the democratic opening predicted by
Indonesia’s President Yudhoyono was in
full swing, and Aung San Suu Kyi, who
for decades had been the imprisoned
conscience of her nation, was serving in
Parliament.
There were other examples that were
less encouraging. Too many Asian
governments continued to resist reforms,
restrict their people’s access to ideas
and information, and imprison them for
expressing dissenting views. Under Kim
Jong Un, North Korea remained the most
closed and repressive country in the
world. As hard as it is to imagine, he
actually made things worse. Cambodia
and Vietnam had made some progress,
but not enough. On a visit to Vietnam in
2010, I learned that several prominent
bloggers had been detained in the days
before my arrival. In my meetings with
Vietnamese officials, I raised specific
concerns about arbitrary restrictions on
fundamental freedoms, including arrests
and the severe sentences too often
imposed on political dissidents,
lawyers, bloggers, Catholic activists,
and Buddhist monks and nuns.
In July 2012, I took another extended
tour across the region, this one designed
to emphasize that democracy and
prosperity go hand in hand. I started
again in Japan, one of the strongest and
richest democracies in the world, and
then visited Vietnam, Cambodia, and
Laos, where I would become the first
Secretary of State to step foot in that
country in fifty-seven years.
I came away with two overall
impressions from my short visit to Laos.
First, Laos was still in the tight grip of
its Communist Party, which itself was
increasingly under the economic and
political control of China. Beijing took
advantage of the relationship to extract
natural resources and push construction
of projects that did little for the average
Laotian. Second, Laotians were still
paying a terrible price for the extensive
bombing the United States carried out
over its territory during the Vietnam
War. It had earned the terrible
distinction of being “the most heavily
bombed country in the world.” This is
why I visited a project in Vientiane
supported by USAID to provide
prosthetics and rehabilitation for the
thousands of adults and children still
losing limbs from the cluster-bombs
littered throughout a third of the country,
only 1 percent of which had been found
and deactivated. I thought the United
States had an ongoing obligation and
was encouraged that in 2012 Congress
tripled funding to speed up the removal
work.
A highlight of this summer 2012 trip
across Asia was Mongolia, where I had
paid an unforgettable first visit in 1995.
That had been a difficult time for the
remote nation squeezed between
northern China and Siberia. Decades of
Soviet domination had tried to impose
Stalinist culture on the nomadic society.
When the aid from Moscow stopped, the
economy crumbled. But, like many
visitors, I was enchanted by Mongolia’s
stark beauty, with its vast wind-swept
steppes, and by the energy,
determination, and hospitality of its
people. In a traditional tent called a ger,
a family of nomads offered me a bowl of
fermented mare’s milk, which tasted like
warm, day-old plain yogurt. I was
impressed by the students, activists, and
government officials I met in the capital
and their commitment to transforming a
one-party Communist dictatorship into a
pluralistic, democratic political system.
It was not going to be an easy journey,
but they were determined to try. I told
them that, from then on, anytime someone
expressed doubts that democracy could
take root in unlikely places, I would tell
them, “Let them come to Mongolia! Let
them see people willing to hold
demonstrations in subzero temperatures
and travel long distances to cast their
ballots in elections.”
When I returned seventeen years later,
a lot had changed in Mongolia and its
neighborhood. China’s rapid
development and its insatiable demand
for natural resources had created a
mining boom in Mongolia, which was
blessed with enormous reserves of
copper and other minerals. The economy
was expanding at the blistering pace of
more than 17 percent in 2011, and some
experts predicted faster growth in
Mongolia over the next decade than in
any other country on earth. Most people
were still poor, and many retained their
nomadic lifestyle, but the global
economy that had once felt so far away
had arrived in full force.
As I drove into the once sleepy
capital, Ulaanbaatar, I was amazed at the
transformation. Glass skyscrapers
soared up from amid a jumble of
traditional gers and old Soviet housing
projects. In Sukhbaatar Square, soldiers
in traditional Mongolian garb stood
guard in the shadow of a new Louis
Vuitton store. I walked into Government
House, a large holdover from the
Stalinist era, past an enormous statue of
Genghis Khan, the 13th-century
Mongolian warrior whose empire
spanned a larger land mass than any
other in history. The Soviets had
suppressed the personality cult of Khan,
but now he was back with a vengeance.
Inside, I met with President Tsakhiagiin
Elbegdorj in his ceremonial ger. We
were sitting in a traditional nomadic
tent, inside a Stalinist-era government
building, discussing the future of the
rapidly growing Asian economy. Talk
about worlds colliding!
Since my 1995 visit, Mongolian
democracy had endured. The country had
held six successful Parliamentary
elections. On television Mongolians
from across the political spectrum
openly and vigorously debated ideas. A
long-awaited freedom of information
law was giving citizens a clearer view
into the workings of their government.
Alongside this progress there was also
cause for concern. The mining boom was
exacerbating the problems of corruption
and inequality, and China was taking a
greater interest in its suddenly valuable
northern neighbor. Mongolia appeared to
be at a crossroads: either it was going to
continue down the democratic path and
use its new riches to raise the standard
of living of all its people, or it was
going to be pulled into Beijing’s orbit
and experience the worst excesses of the
“resource curse.” I hoped to encourage
the former and discourage the latter.
The timing was good. The Community
of Democracies, an international
organization founded in 2000 under the
leadership of Secretary Albright to
nurture emerging democracies,
especially those in the former Soviet
bloc, was holding a summit in
Ulaanbaatar. This would be an
opportunity to reinforce Mongolia’s
progress and send a message about the
importance of democracy and human
rights across Asia, delivered in China’s
own backyard.
It’s not a secret that the epicenter of
the antidemocratic movement in Asia is
China. The 2010 Nobel Peace Prize had
been awarded to the imprisoned Chinese
human rights activist Liu Xiaobo, and the
world took note of his empty chair at the
ceremony in Oslo. Afterward I warned
that it could become “a symbol of a great
nation’s unrealized potential and
unfulfilled promise.” Things had only
gotten worse in 2011. In the first few
months, dozens of public interest
lawyers, writers, artists, intellectuals,
and activists were arbitrarily detained
and arrested. Among them was the
prominent artist Ai Weiwei, whose
cause I and others championed.
In my speech in Ulaanbaatar I
explained why a democratic future for
Asia was the right choice. In China and
elsewhere opponents of democracy
argued that it would threaten stability by
unleashing chaotic popular forces. But
we had plenty of evidence from around
the world that democracy actually
fosters stability. It is true that clamping
down on political expression and
maintaining a tight grip on what people
read or say or see can create the illusion
of security, but illusions fade, while
people’s yearning for liberty does not.
By contrast, democracy provides critical
safety valves for societies. It allows
people to select their leaders, gives
those leaders legitimacy to make
difficult but necessary decisions for the
national good, and lets minorities
express their views peacefully.
Another argument I wanted to rebut
was that democracy is a privilege
belonging to wealthy countries and that
developing economies need to put
growth first and worry about democracy
later. China was often cited as the prime
example of a country that had achieved
economic success without meaningful
political reform. But that too was a
“shortsighted and ultimately
unsustainable bargain,” I said. “You
cannot over the long run have economic
liberalization without political
liberalization. Countries that want to be
open for business but closed to free
expression will find the approach comes
with a cost.” Without the free exchange
of ideas and strong rule of law,
innovation and entrepreneurship wither.
I pledged that the United States would
be a strong partner to all those across
Asia and the world who were dedicated
to human rights and fundamental
freedoms. I had been saying “Let them
come to Mongolia!” for years, and I was
delighted that so many democracy
activists finally had. Back home a
Washington Post editorial declared that
my speech had offered “hope that the
U.S. pivot to Asia will go beyond
simple muscle-flexing and become a
multi-layered approach to match the
complexity of China’s rise as a modern
superpower.” In China, however,
censors went right to work erasing
mentions of my message from the
internet.
4

China: Uncharted
Waters

Like many Americans, my first real
look at China came in 1972, when
President Richard Nixon made his
historic trip across the Pacific. Bill and I
were law students without a television,
so we went out and rented a portable set
with rabbit ears. We lugged it back to
our apartment and tuned in every night to
watch scenes of a country that had been
blocked from view for our entire lives. I
was riveted and proud of what America
accomplished during what President
Nixon called “the week that changed the
world.”
Looking back, it’s clear that both
sides had taken enormous risks. They
were venturing into the unknown, during
the height of the Cold War no less. There
could be serious political consequences
at home for leaders on both sides for
appearing weak or, in our case, “soft on
Communism.” But the men who
negotiated the trip, Henry Kissinger for
the United States and Zhou Enlai for
China, and the leaders they represented,
calculated that the potential benefits
outweighed the risks. (I have joked with
Henry that he was lucky there were no
smartphones or social media when he
made his first secret trip to Beijing.
Imagine if a Secretary tried to do that
today.) We do similar calculations today
when we deal with nations whose
policies we disagree with but whose
cooperation we need, or when we want
to avoid letting disagreements and
competition slip into conflict.
The U.S.-China relationship is still
full of challenges. We are two large,
complex nations with profoundly
different histories, political systems, and
outlooks, whose economies and futures
have become deeply entwined. This isn’t
a relationship that fits neatly into
categories like friend or rival, and it
may never. We are sailing in uncharted
waters. Staying on course and avoiding
the shoals and whirlpools requires both
a true compass and the flexibility to
make frequent course corrections,
including sometimes painful trade-offs.
If we push too hard on one front, we may
jeopardize another. By the same token, if
we are too quick to compromise or
accommodate, we may invite aggression.
With all these elements to consider, it
can be easy to lose sight of the fact that,
across the divide, our counterparts have
their own pressures and imperatives.
The more both sides follow the example
of those intrepid early diplomats to
bridge the gaps in understanding and
interests, the better chance we will have
of making progress.

My first trip to China, in 1995, was
among the most memorable of my life.
The Fourth World Conference on
Women, at which I declared, “Human
rights are women’s rights and women’s
rights are human rights,” was a profound
experience for me. I felt the heavy hand
of Chinese censorship when the
government blocked the broadcast of my
speech, both throughout the conference
center and on official television and
radio. Most of my speech was about
women’s rights, but I also sent a
message to the Chinese authorities, who
had banished the events for civil society
activists to a separate site in Huairou, a
full hour’s drive outside Beijing, and
barred women from Tibet and Taiwan
from attending at all. “Freedom means
the right of people to assemble,
organize, and debate openly,” I declared
from the podium. “It means respecting
the views of those who may disagree
with the views of their governments. It
means not taking citizens away from
their loved ones and jailing them,
mistreating them or denying them their
freedom or dignity because of the
peaceful expression of their ideas and
opinions.” Those were more pointed
words than American diplomats usually
used, especially on Chinese soil, and
some in the U.S. government had urged
me to give a different speech or not
speak at all. But I thought it was
important to stand up for democratic
values and human rights in a place
where they were seriously threatened.
In June 1998, I returned to China for a
longer stay. Chelsea and my mom
accompanied Bill and me on an official
state visit. The Chinese requested a
formal arrival ceremony in Tiananmen
Square, where tanks had crushed prodemocracy demonstrations in June 1989.
Bill thought about refusing the request,
so as not to appear to endorse or ignore
that ugly history, but in the end he
decided that his human rights message
might get through more in China if he
acted like a respectful guest. The
Chinese, in turn, surprised us by
permitting the uncensored broadcast of
Bill’s news conference with President
Jiang Zemin, during which they had an
extended exchange about human rights,
including the taboo topic of Tibet. They
also broadcast Bill’s speech to students
at Beijing University as well, in which
he stressed that “true freedom includes
more than economic freedom.”
I came home from the trip convinced
that if China over time embraces reform
and modernization, it could become a
constructive world power and an
important partner for the United States.
But it was not going to be easy, and
America would have to be smart and
vigilant in how we engaged this growing
nation.
I returned to China as Secretary in
February 2009 with the goal of building
a relationship durable enough to weather
the inevitable disputes and crises that
would arise. I also wanted to embed the
China relationship in our broader Asia
strategy, engaging Beijing in the region’s
multilateral institutions in ways that
would encourage it to work with its
neighbors according to agreed-upon
rules. At the same time, I wanted China
to know that it was not the sole focus of
our attention in Asia. We would not
sacrifice our values or our traditional
allies in order to win better terms with
China. Despite its impressive economic
growth and advances in military
capacity, it had not yet come close to
surpassing the United States as the most
powerful nation in the Asia-Pacific. We
were prepared to engage from a position
of strength.
Before arriving in Beijing from South
Korea, I sat down to talk with our
traveling press corps. I told them I
would emphasize cooperation on the
global economic crisis, climate change,
and security issues, such as North Korea
and Afghanistan. After listing the agenda
highlights, I mentioned that the sensitive
issues of Taiwan, Tibet, and human
rights would also be on the table and
said, “We pretty much know what
they’re going to say.”
It was true, of course. American
diplomats had been raising these issues
for years, and the Chinese were quite
predictable in their responses. I
remembered a heated discussion I had
with former President Jiang about
China’s treatment of Tibet during the
state dinner Bill and I hosted for him at
the White House in October 1997. I had
met previously with the Dalai Lama to
discuss the Tibetans’ plight, and I asked
President Jiang to explain China’s
repression. “The Chinese are the
liberators of the Tibetan people. I have
read the histories in our libraries, and I
know Tibetans are better off now than
they were before,” he replied. “But what
about their traditions and the right to
practice their religion as they choose?” I
persisted. He forcefully insisted that
Tibet was a part of China and demanded
to know why Americans advocated for
those “necromancers.” Tibetans “were
victims of religion. They are now freed
from feudalism,” he declared.
So I had no illusions about what
Chinese officials would be saying to me
when I raised these issues again. I also
made the obvious point that, given the
breadth and complexity of our
relationship with China, our profound
differences on human rights could not
exclude engagement on all other issues.
We had to be able to stand up forcefully
for dissidents while also seeking
cooperation on the economy, climate
change, and nuclear proliferation. This
had been our approach since Nixon went
to China. Nonetheless my comments
were widely interpreted to mean that
human rights would not be a priority for
the Obama Administration and that the
Chinese could safely ignore them.
Nothing could have been further from
reality, as future events showed. Still, it
was a valuable lesson: now that I was
America’s chief diplomat, every
utterance would be subjected to a whole
new level of scrutiny, and even
seemingly self-evident observations
could set off a feeding frenzy in the
media.
It had been more than a decade since
my previous visit, and driving through
Beijing was like watching a movie in
fast-forward. Where once only a handful
of high-rise buildings were visible, now
the sky was dominated by the gleaming
new Olympic complex and endless
corporate towers. Streets that had once
been full of Flying Pigeon bicycles were
now jammed with cars.
While in Beijing I met with a group of
women activists, some of whom I had
gotten to know in 1998. At that time
Secretary Albright and I had crowded
into a cramped legal aid office to hear
about their efforts to win rights for
women to own property, have a say in
marriage and divorce, and be treated as
equal citizens. More than ten years later
the size of the group and the scope of
their collective efforts had grown. Now
there were activists working not just for
women’s legal rights but for their
environmental, health, and economic
rights as well.
One of them was Dr. Gao Yaojie, a
diminutive eighty-two-year-old who had
been harassed by the government for
speaking out about AIDS in China and
exposing a tainted blood scandal. When
we first met I noticed her tiny feet—they
had been bound—and was amazed by
her story. She had persevered through
civil war, the Cultural Revolution, house
arrest, and forced family separation, and
she never shied away from her
commitment to help as many of her
fellow citizens as possible protect
themselves against AIDS.
In 2007, I interceded with President
Hu Jintao to allow Dr. Gao to come to
Washington to receive an award after
local officials tried to prevent her from
traveling. Here we were two years later,
and she was still facing government
pressure. Nonetheless she told me she
planned to continue advocating for
transparency and accountability. “I am
already 82. I am not going to live that
much longer,” she said. “This is an
important issue. I am not afraid.” Not
long after my visit, Dr. Gao was forced
to leave China. She now lives in New
York City, where she continues to write
and speak out about AIDS in China.
Much of my time on this first visit to
Beijing as Secretary was filled with getto-know-you sessions with senior
Chinese officials. I met for lunch with
State Councilor Dai Bingguo at the
serene and traditional Diaoyutai State
Guesthouse, where President Nixon
stayed on his famous visit and where we
had stayed during our 1998 trip. Dai,
along with Foreign Minister Yang
Jiechi, would become my primary
counterparts in the Chinese government.
(In the Chinese system, a State Councilor
is more senior than a Minister, ranking
just below a Vice Premier in the
hierarchy.)
A career diplomat, Dai was close to
President Hu and adept at maneuvering
the internal politics of the Chinese
power structure. He was proud of his
reputation as a man from the provinces
who had risen to prominence. Small and
compact, he stayed vigorous and healthy
despite his advancing years by doing
regular exercise and taking long walks,
which he highly recommended to me. He
was comfortable discussing history and
philosophy as well as current events.
Henry Kissinger had told me how highly
he valued his relationship with Dai,
whom he found to be one of the most
fascinating and open-minded Chinese
officials he had ever encountered. Dai
thought about the grand sweep of history,
and he approvingly repeated the proverb
I had used in my Asia Society speech:
“When you are in a common boat, cross
the river peacefully together.” When I
told him that I thought the United States
and China had to write a new answer to
the age-old question of what happens
when an established power and a rising
power meet, he enthusiastically agreed,
and frequently repeated my formulation.
Throughout history, that scenario had
often led to conflict, so it was our job to
chart a course that avoided that end by
keeping competition within acceptable
boundaries and promoting as much
cooperation as possible.
Dai and I hit it off right away, and we
talked often over the years. Sometimes
I’d be subjected to long lectures about
everything the United States was doing
wrong in Asia, laced with sarcasm but
always delivered with a smile. At other
times the two of us talked deeply and
personally about the need to put the
U.S.-China relationship on a sound
footing for the sake of future generations.
On one of my early visits to Beijing, Dai
presented me with thoughtful personal
gifts for Chelsea and my mother, which
was above and beyond the normal
diplomatic protocol. The next time he
came to Washington, I reciprocated with
a gift for his only granddaughter, which
seemed to please him very much. In an
early meeting, he had pulled out a small
photograph of the baby girl and showed
it to me, saying, “This is what we’re in it
for.” That sentiment struck a chord with
me. It was concern for the welfare of
children that got me into public service
in the first place. As Secretary of State I
had the chance to make the world a little
safer and life a little better for children
in America and across the globe,
including in China. I viewed it as the
opportunity and the responsibility of a
lifetime. That Dai shared my passion
became the basis of an enduring bond
between us.
Foreign Minister Yang had risen up
the ranks of the diplomatic corps,
starting as an interpreter. His superb
command of English enabled us to have
long, sometimes spirited conversations
during our many meetings and phone
calls. He rarely dropped his careful
diplomatic persona, but I could
occasionally glimpse the real person
behind it. Once he told me that, as a
child growing up in Shanghai, he sat in
an unheated classroom, shivering, his
hands too cold to hold a pen. His
journey from the freezing schoolhouse
all the way to the Foreign Ministry was
a source of his great personal pride in
China’s progress. He was an
unapologetic nationalist, and we had our
share of tense exchanges, especially
about difficult topics like the South
China Sea, North Korea, and territorial
disputes with Japan.
Late one night, in one of our last
discussions in 2012, Yang started
waxing on about China’s many
superlative achievements, including its
athletic dominance. It was just about a
month after the London Olympics, and I
gently pointed out that America, in fact,
had won the most medals of any country.
Yang, in turn, chalked up China’s
“decline in fortunes” at the Olympics to
the absence of the injured basketball star
Yao Ming. He also joked that there
should be a “diplomacy Olympics” with
events like “miles traveled”; that would
net the United States at least one more
medal.
In my first conversation with Yang in
February 2009, he brought up a topic I
didn’t expect that was clearly bothering
him. The Chinese were preparing to host
a major international exposition in May
2010, like the world’s fairs of an earlier
era. Every country in the world was
responsible for building a pavilion on
the exposition grounds to showcase their
national culture and traditions. Only two
nations were failing to participate, Yang
told me: tiny Andorra and the United
States. The Chinese saw that as a sign of
disrespect, and also of American
decline. I was surprised to learn that we
weren’t pulling our weight and pledged
to Yang that I would make sure the
United States was well represented.
I soon discovered that the USA
Pavilion was out of money, way behind
schedule, and unlikely ever to be
completed unless things changed
dramatically. This was not a good way
to project American power and values in
Asia. So I made it a personal priority to
get our pavilion built, which meant
raising money and support from the
private sector in record time.
We pulled it off, and in May 2010, I
joined millions of other visitors from
around the world to tour the expo. The
USA Pavilion showcased American
products and stories that illustrated some
of our most cherished national values:
perseverance, innovation, and diversity.
What struck me most were the American
students who volunteered to serve as
hosts and guides. They represented the
full spectrum of the American people,
from every walk of life and background,
and they all spoke Mandarin. Many
Chinese visitors were stunned to hear
Americans speak their language so
enthusiastically. They stopped to talk,
asked questions, told jokes, and
swapped stories. It was another
reminder that personal contacts can do
as much or more for the U.S.-China
relationship than most diplomatic
encounters or choreographed summits.
After my discussions with Dai and
Yang on that February 2009 visit, I had
the opportunity to meet separately with
President Hu and Premier Wen. It was
the first of at least a dozen encounters
over the years. The senior leaders were
more scripted than Dai or Yang and less
comfortable in a freewheeling
discussion. The higher you went up the
chain, the higher the premium the
Chinese put on predictability, formality,
and respectful decorum. They didn’t
want any surprises. Appearances
mattered. With me, they were careful
and polite, even a little wary. They were
studying me, just as I was studying them.
Hu was gracious, expressing his
appreciation for my decision to make
such an early visit to China. He was the
most powerful man in China, but he
lacked the personal authority of
predecessors such as Deng Xiaoping or
Jiang Zemin. Hu seemed to me more like
an aloof chairman of the board than a
hands-on CEO. How in control he really
was of the entire sprawling Communist
Party apparatus was an open question,
especially when it came to the military.
“Grandpa Wen,” as the Premier (the
#2 official) was called, worked hard to
present a kindly, soft-spoken image to
China and the world. But in private he
could be quite pointed, especially when
he was arguing that the United States
was responsible for the global financial
crisis or when he brushed aside
criticism of China’s policies. He was
never combative, but he was more
cutting than his public persona might
have suggested.
In my early meetings with these
leaders, I proposed making the U.S.China economic dialogue started by
former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson
a strategic dialogue as well, to cover a
much wider range of issues and bring
together more experts and officials from
across our two governments. This
wasn’t an excuse for the State
Department to elbow into the
conversation or to set up a high-profile
debating society. I knew that regular
talks, in essence a high-level steering
committee for the relationship, would
expand our cooperation into new areas
and build greater trust and resiliency.
Policymakers on both sides would get to
know each other and become used to
working together. Open lines of
communication would reduce the
likelihood that a misunderstanding
would escalate tensions. Future disputes
would be less likely to derail everything
else we needed to do together.
I had discussed this idea with Hank
Paulson’s successor at Treasury, Tim
Geithner, over lunch at the State
Department in early February 2009. I
had gotten to know and like Tim when he
was President of the New York Federal
Reserve. He had extensive experience in
Asia and even spoke a little Mandarin,
making him an ideal partner in our
engagement with China. To his credit,
Tim did not see my proposal for the
expanded dialogue as an intrusion on
Treasury’s turf—turf, of course, being a
precious Washington commodity. He
saw it as I did: as a chance to combine
our departments’ strengths, especially at
a time when the global financial crisis
was blurring the line between economics
and security more than ever. If the
Chinese agreed, Tim and I would chair
the new combined dialogue together.
In Beijing I was prepared for
reluctance, even rejection. After all, the
Chinese were not eager to discuss
sensitive political topics. Yet it turned
out they were also eager for more highlevel contact with the United States, and
were seeking what President Hu Jintao
called a “positive, cooperative and
comprehensive relationship.” In time our
Strategic and Economic Dialogue would
become a model we replicated with
emerging powers around the world, from
India to South Africa and Brazil.
For decades, the guiding doctrine of
Chinese foreign policy was Deng
Xiaoping’s counsel, “Coolly observe,
calmly deal with things, hold your
position, hide your capacities, bide your
time, accomplish things where
possible.” Deng, who ruled China after
the death of Chairman Mao Zedong,
believed that China was not yet strong
enough to assert itself on the world
stage, and his “hide and bide” strategy
helped avoid conflict with neighbors as
China’s economy took off. Bill and I met
Deng briefly on his historic tour of the
United States in 1979. I had never met a
Chinese leader before and closely
observed him as he casually interacted
with the American guests at a reception
and dinner at the Georgia Governor’s
Mansion. He was engaging and made an
excellent impression, both personally
and in his willingness to begin opening
his country up to reform.
By 2009, however, some officials in
China, especially in the military, chafed
at this posture of restraint. They thought
that the United States, long the most
powerful nation in the Asia-Pacific, was
receding from the region but still
determined to block China’s rise as a
great power in its own right. It was, they
thought, time for a more assertive
approach. They were emboldened by the
financial crisis of 2008 that weakened
the U.S. economy, the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan that sapped American
attention and resources, and a rising
current of nationalism among the
Chinese people. And so China started
making more aggressive moves in Asia,
testing how hard it could push.
In November 2009, President Obama
received a noticeably lukewarm
reception during his visit to Beijing. The
Chinese insisted on stage-managing most
of his appearances, refused to give any
ground on issues such as human rights or
currency valuation, and offered pointed
lectures on America’s budget problems.
The New York Times described the joint
press conference between President
Obama and President Hu as “stilted”—
so much so that it was parodied on
Saturday Night Live. Many observers
wondered whether we were seeing a
new phase in the relationship, with an
ascendant and assertive China no longer
hiding its resources and enhanced
military capabilities, moving away from
“hide and bide” and toward “show and
tell.”
The most dramatic arena for Chinese
assertiveness was at sea. China,
Vietnam, the Philippines, and Japan all
have coasts on the South and East China
Seas. For generations they have jousted
over competing territorial claims in the
area, over strings of reefs, rocks,
outcroppings, and mostly uninhabited
islands. In the south, China and Vietnam
clashed violently over contested islands
in the 1970s and 1980s. China tangled
with the Philippines in the 1990s over
other islands. In the East China Sea, a
chain of eight uninhabited islands,
known as the Senkakus to the Japanese
and the Diaoyus to the Chinese, have
been the subject of a long and heated
dispute that, as of 2014, continues to
simmer and threatens to boil over at any
time. In November 2013, China declared
an “air defense identification zone” over
much of the East China Sea, including
the disputed islands, and demanded that
all international air traffic adhere to its
regulations. The United States and our
allies refused to recognize this move and
continued to fly military planes through
what we still consider international
airspace.
These conflicts may not be new, but
the stakes have risen. As Asia’s
economy has grown, so has the trade
flowing through the region. At least half
the world’s merchant tonnage passes
through the South China Sea, including
many shipments headed to or from the
United States. Discoveries of new
offshore energy reserves and
surrounding fisheries have made the
waters around otherwise unremarkable
clumps of rocks into potential treasure
troves. Old rivalries heightened by the
prospect of new riches make for a
combustible recipe.
Throughout 2009 and 2010 China’s
neighbors watched with increasing
alarm as Beijing accelerated a naval
buildup and asserted its claim to wide
swaths of water, islands, and energy
reserves. These actions were the
opposite of what former U.S. Deputy
Secretary of State (and later president of
the World Bank) Robert Zoellick had
hoped for when he urged China to
become a “responsible stakeholder” in a
much-noted speech in 2005. Instead
China was becoming what I called a
“selective stakeholder,” picking and
choosing when to act like a responsible
great power and when to assert the right
to impose its will on its smaller
neighbors.
In March 2009, just two months into
the Obama Administration, five Chinese
ships confronted a lightly armed U.S.
naval vessel, the Impeccable, about
seventy-five miles from the Chinese
island province of Hainan. The Chinese
demanded that the Americans leave what
they claimed were exclusive territorial
waters. The crew of the Impeccable
responded that they were in international
waters and had a right to free navigation.
Chinese sailors threw pieces of wood in
the water to block the ship’s path. The
Americans responded by spraying a fire
hose at the Chinese, some of whom
stripped to their underwear after being
doused. The scene could almost be
considered comical if it didn’t represent
a potentially dangerous confrontation.
Over the next two years, similar
standoffs at sea between China and
Japan, China and Vietnam, and China
and the Philippines threatened to spiral
out of control. Something had to be done.
China prefers to resolve territorial
disputes with its neighbors bilaterally,
or one-on-one, because in those
situations its relative power is greater.
In multilateral settings where smaller
nations could band together, its sway
decreased. Not surprisingly, most of the
rest of the region preferred the
multilateral approach. They believed
there were too many overlapping claims
and interests to try to settle them in a
patchwork, one-off fashion. Getting all
the relevant players in the same room
and giving them all a chance to express
their views—especially the smaller
countries—was the best way to move
toward a comprehensive solution.
I agreed with this approach. The
United States has no territorial claims in
the South or East China Seas, we don’t
take sides in such disputes, and we
oppose unilateral efforts to change the
status quo. We have an abiding interest
in protecting freedom of navigation,
maritime commerce, and international
law. And we have treaty obligations to
support Japan and the Philippines.
My concerns escalated when I was in
Beijing for the Strategic and Economic
Dialogue in May 2010 and for the first
time heard Chinese leaders describe the
country’s territorial claims in the South
China Sea as a “core interest” alongside
traditional hot-button topics like Taiwan
and Tibet. They warned that China
would not tolerate outside interference.
Later the meetings were disrupted when
a Chinese admiral stood up and launched
into an angry rant accusing the United
States of trying to encircle China and
suppress its rise. This was highly
unusual in a carefully choreographed
summit, and—although I assumed the
admiral had gotten at least a tacit goahead from his military and party bosses
—it appeared that some of the Chinese
diplomats were as surprised as I was.
The confrontations in the South China
Sea in the first two years of the Obama
Administration reinforced my belief that
our strategy in Asia must include a
significant effort to upgrade the region’s
multilateral institutions. The available
venues just weren’t effective enough for
resolving disputes between nations or
mobilizing action. For the smaller
nations, it could feel like the Wild West:
a frontier without the rule of law, where
the weak were at the mercy of the strong.
Our goal was not just to help defuse
flash points like the South or East China
Sea but also to nurture an international
system of rules and organizations in the
Asia-Pacific that could help avoid future
conflicts and bring some order and longterm stability to the region—something
that began to approximate what Europe
had built.
On the flight home from the talks in
Beijing, I took stock with my team. I
thought China had overplayed its hand.
Instead of using the period of our
perceived absence and the economic
crisis to cement good relations with its
neighbors, it had become more
aggressive toward them, and that shift
had unnerved the rest of the region.
When times are good with few threats to
security or prosperity, nations are less
likely to see the appeal of expensive
defense alliances, strong international
rules and norms, and robust multilateral
institutions. But when conflict unsettles
the status quo, these agreements and
protections become a lot more attractive,
especially to smaller nations.
Perhaps there was an opportunity to be
found amid all these troubling
developments. One presented itself just
two months later at an ASEAN regional
forum in Vietnam. I touched down in
Hanoi on July 22, 2010, and went to a
lunch marking the fifteenth anniversary
of normalized diplomatic relations
between Vietnam and the United States.
I vividly remembered the day in July
1995 when Bill made the historic
announcement in the East Room of the
White House, flanked by Vietnam
veterans, including Senators John Kerry
and John McCain. It was the beginning
of a new era—healing old wounds,
settling questions about prisoners of
war, and charting a path of improved
economic and strategic relations. In
2000, we went to Hanoi, the first visit
by a U.S. President. We were prepared
to find resentment, even hostility, but as
we drove into the city, large crowds
lined the streets to welcome us. Throngs
of students, who had grown up knowing
only peace between our nations,
gathered at Hanoi National University to
hear Bill speak. Everywhere we went
we felt the warmth and hospitality of the
Vietnamese people, a reflection of the
goodwill that had developed between
our countries in the span of a single
generation and a powerful testament to
the fact that the past does not have to
determine the future.
Back in Hanoi as Secretary of State, I
marveled at how far Vietnam had come
since that visit and how our relations
continued to improve. Our annual trade
had grown to nearly $20 billion in 2010
from less than $250 million before
relations were normalized, and it was
expanding rapidly every year. Vietnam
also presented a unique—though
challenging—strategic opportunity. On
the one hand, it remained an
authoritarian country with a poor record
on human rights, especially press
freedoms. On the other, it was steadily
taking steps to open up its economy and
trying to claim a larger role in the
region. Over the years Vietnamese
officials had told me that, despite the
war we had fought against them, they
admired and liked America.
One of our most important tools for
engaging with Vietnam was a proposed
new trade agreement called the TransPacific Partnership (TPP), which would
link markets throughout Asia and the
Americas, lowering trade barriers while
raising standards on labor, the
environment, and intellectual property.
As President Obama explained, the goal
of the TPP negotiations is to establish “a
high standard, enforceable, meaningful
trade agreement” that “is going to be
incredibly powerful for American
companies who, up until this point, have
often been locked out of those markets.”
It was also important for American
workers, who would benefit from
competing on a more level playing field.
And it was a strategic initiative that
would strengthen the position of the
United States in Asia.
Our country has learned the hard way
over the past several decades that
globalization and the expansion of
international trade brings costs as well
as benefits. On the 2008 campaign trail,
both then-Senator Obama and I had
promised to pursue smarter, fairer trade
agreements. Because TPP negotiations
are still ongoing, it makes sense to
reserve judgment until we can evaluate
the final proposed agreement. It’s safe to
say that the TPP won’t be perfect—no
deal negotiated among a dozen countries
ever will be—but its higher standards, if
implemented and enforced, should
benefit American businesses and
workers.
Vietnam also stood to gain a lot from
this deal—the TPP would cover a third
of world trade—so its leaders were
willing to make some reforms to reach
an agreement. As negotiations gained
momentum, other countries in the region
felt the same way. The TPP became the
signature economic pillar of our strategy
in Asia, demonstrating the benefits of a
rules-based order and greater
cooperation with the United States.
On the afternoon of July 22, the
ASEAN regional meetings began in
Hanoi’s National Convention Center
with long, formal discussions on trade,
climate change, human trafficking,
nuclear proliferation, North Korea, and
Burma. But as the meetings stretched
into the second day, there was one topic
on everyone’s mind: the South China
Sea. The territorial disputes, already
fraught with history, nationalism, and
economics, had become a crucial test
question: Would China use its growing
power to dominate an expanding sphere
of influence, or would the region
reaffirm international norms that bind
even the strongest nations? Naval
vessels were squaring off in contested
waters, newspapers were whipping up
nationalist sentiments across the region,
and diplomats were scrambling to
prevent open conflict. Yet China kept
insisting this wasn’t an appropriate topic
for a regional conference.
That night I gathered Kurt Campbell
and my Asia team to review our plans
for the next day. What we had in mind
would require subtle diplomacy, calling
on all the groundwork we had laid in the
region over the past year and a half. We
spent hours fine-tuning the statement I
would make the next day and working
out the choreography with our partners.
As soon as we started the ASEAN
session, the drama began to build.
Vietnam got the ball rolling. Despite
China’s objections to discussing the
South China Sea in this setting, Vietnam
raised the contentious issue. Then, one
by one, other Ministers expressed their
concerns and called for a collaborative,
multilateral approach to resolving
territorial disputes. After two years of
China’s flexing its muscles and asserting
its dominance, the region was pushing
back. When the moment was right, I
signaled my intention to speak.
The United States would not take
sides on any particular dispute, I said,
but we supported the multilateral
approach being proposed, in accordance
with international law and without
coercion or the threat of force. I urged
the nations of the region to protect
unfettered access to the South China Sea
and to work toward developing a code
of conduct that would prevent conflict.
The United States was prepared to
facilitate this process because we saw
freedom of navigation in the South China
Sea as a “national interest.” That was a
carefully chosen phrase, answering the
earlier Chinese assertion that its
expansive territorial claims in the area
constituted a “core interest.”
When I was finished, I could see that
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang was
livid. He asked for an hour-long break
before coming back to deliver his
response. Staring directly at me, he
dismissed the disputes in the South
China Sea and warned against outside
interference. Looking at his Asian
neighbors, he reminded them, “China is
a big country. Bigger than any other
countries here.” It was not a winning
argument in that room.
The confrontation in Hanoi did not
resolve the contests in the South and
East China Seas; those remain active and
dangerous as of this writing. But in
subsequent years, diplomats in the
region would point to that meeting as a
tipping point, both in terms of American
leadership in Asia and in the pushback
against Chinese overreach.
As I headed back to Washington, I felt
more confident about our strategy and
position in Asia. When we started in
2009, many in the region doubted our
commitment and our staying power.
Some in China sought to take advantage
of that perception. Our pivot strategy
was designed to dispel those doubts.
During one long discussion with Dai, he
exclaimed, “Why don’t you ‘pivot’ out
of here?” I had logged more miles and
sat through more awkwardly translated
diplomatic speeches than I imagined
possible. But it paid off. We had
climbed out of the hole we found
ourselves in at the beginning of the
administration and reasserted America’s
presence in the region. The years that
followed would bring new challenges,
from a sudden leadership change in
North Korea to a standoff with the
Chinese over the fate of a blind human
rights dissident hiding in the U.S.
Embassy. There would be new
opportunities as well. Flickers of
progress in Burma would ignite a
dramatic transformation and carry the
promise of democracy into the heart of
that formerly closed land. And thanks in
part to our determined efforts to
establish mutual trust and habits of
cooperation, relations with China would
prove more resilient than many dared
hope.

On the plane home from Hanoi, with my
head still full of South China Sea drama,
it was time to turn my attention to other
urgent business. We were just over a
week away from what would be one of
the most important events in my life. The
press was clamoring for information,
and I had a lot of work to do to get
ready. This time it wasn’t a high-level
summit or a diplomatic crisis. It was my
daughter’s wedding, a day I had been
looking forward to for thirty years.
I was amused by how much attention
Chelsea’s plans were getting, and not
just in the United States. In Poland in
early July, an interviewer had asked me
how I was juggling preparations for the
wedding while representing America as
Secretary of State. “How can you cope
with two quite different tasks, but both
of them extremely serious?” he asked.
And how serious a task it was! When
Bill and I got married in 1975, the
ceremony took place in front of a few
friends and family in the living room of
our little house in Fayetteville,
Arkansas. I wore a lace-and-muslin
Victorian dress I had found shopping
with my mother the night before. Times
had changed.
Chelsea and our soon-to-be son-inlaw, Marc Mezvinsky, planned an
unforgettable weekend for their families
and friends in Rhinebeck, New York. As
mother of the bride, I was delighted to
help in every way I could, including
reviewing photographs of flower
arrangements from the road and making
time for tastings and dress selections
back home. I felt lucky that my day job
had prepared me for the elaborate
diplomacy required to help plan a big
wedding. I got such a kick out of it that I
referred to myself as “MOTB” (mother
of the bride) in a Mother’s Day email to
all State Department staff, also a nod to
a necklace Chelsea had given me for
Christmas with those same letters. Now
that Hanoi was behind me, I was eager
to get back to all the last-minute details
and decisions that awaited.
On Monday I spent most of the day at
the White House, meeting with President
Obama in the Oval Office and with the
rest of the national security team in the
Situation Room and visiting with Israeli
Defense Minister Ehud Barak. I always
enjoy seeing Ehud, and we were at
another delicate moment for peace
negotiations in the Middle East, but this
time I couldn’t stop thinking about when
I could leave and jump on a shuttle flight
up to New York.
The big day finally arrived on
Saturday, July 31. Rhinebeck is a lovely
town in the Hudson Valley with quaint
shops and good restaurants, and it
provided the perfect setting. Chelsea’s
and Marc’s friends and family gathered
at Astor Courts, an elegant Beaux Arts
estate designed by the architect Stanford
White for Jacob and Ava Astor around
the turn of the century. Its indoor
swimming pool, where Franklin Delano
Roosevelt is said to have performed
physical therapy for his polio, may have
been the first built for a private home
anywhere in America. After Jacob Astor
went down with the Titanic, the house
was passed from owner to owner and
spent a number of years as a nursing
home run by the Catholic Church. In
2008 it was restored to its original
beauty.
Chelsea looked absolutely stunning,
and watching her walk down the aisle
with Bill, I couldn’t believe that the
baby girl I had held in my arms for the
first time on February 27, 1980, had
grown into this beautiful and poised
woman. Bill was as emotional as I was,
maybe even more so, and I was just glad
he made it down the aisle in one piece.
Marc was beaming as Chelsea joined
him under the chuppah, a canopy of
willow branches and flowers that is part
of the Jewish marriage tradition. The
service was led by the Reverend
William Shillady and Rabbi James
Ponet, and they hit just the right note.
Marc stepped on a glass, in keeping with
Jewish tradition, and everyone cheered.
Afterward Bill danced with Chelsea to
“The Way You Look Tonight.” It was
one of the happiest and proudest
moments of my life.
So many thoughts went through my
head. Our family had been through a lot
together, good times and hard times, and
now here we were, celebrating the best
of times. I was especially glad that my
mother had been able to see this day.
She overcame a difficult childhood with
very little love or support, and yet still
figured out how to be a loving and
caring mom to me and my brothers, Hugh
and Tony. She and Chelsea shared a
special bond, and I knew how much it
meant to Chelsea to have her
grandmother beside her as she planned
her wedding and married Marc.
I thought about the future, and the life
that Chelsea and Marc would build
together. They had so many dreams and
ambitions. This, I thought, is why Bill
and I had worked so hard for so many
years to help build a better world—so
Chelsea could grow up safe and happy
and one day have a family of her own,
and so every other child would have the
same chance. I remembered what Dai
Bingguo had said to me when he pulled
out the photograph of his granddaughter:
“This is what we’re in it for.” It was our
responsibility to find a way to work
together to make sure our children and
grandchildren inherited the world they
deserved.
5

Beijing: The Dissident

Shortly after I was confirmed as
Secretary, a team of engineers
descended on our home in northwest
Washington. They installed a bright
yellow secure telephone so that even at
odd hours of the night, I could speak to
the President or an Ambassador in some
faraway embassy about sensitive topics.
It was a constant reminder that the
troubles of the world were never far
from home.
At 9:36 on the night of Wednesday,
April 25, 2012, the yellow phone rang. It
was my Director of Policy Planning and
Deputy Chief of Staff Jake Sullivan,
calling from his own secure line on the
seventh floor of the State Department,
where he’d hastily returned from a rare
night off. He told me that our embassy in
Beijing faced an unexpected crisis and
urgently needed direction.
Unbeknownst to us, less than a week
earlier, a blind, forty-year-old human
rights activist named Chen Guangcheng
had escaped from house arrest in
Shandong Province by climbing over the
wall of his home. He broke his foot but
managed to elude the local police
assigned to watch him. Leaving his
family behind, he set out on a journey
hundreds of miles to Beijing with the
help of a modern-day Underground
Railroad of fellow dissidents and
supporters. While in hiding in Beijing he
made contact with a Foreign Service
officer at the American Embassy who
had long ties to the Chinese human rights
community. She immediately recognized
the seriousness of the situation.
Chen had gained notoriety in China as
the “barefoot lawyer,” advocating for
the rights of the disabled, helping rural
villagers protest illegal land seizures by
corrupt local authorities, and
documenting abuses of the one-child
policy such as forced sterilizations and
abortions. Unlike many other highprofile Chinese dissidents, Chen was not
a student at an elite university or an
urban intellectual. He was a villager
himself, poor and self-taught, and the
public came to see him as a genuine man
of the people. In 2005 he was arrested
after filing a class-action lawsuit on
behalf of thousands of victims of
government repression. A local court
sentenced him to fifty-one months in
prison, supposedly for destroying
property and obstructing traffic. It was a
blunt miscarriage of justice, shocking
even in a country with little rule of law.
After serving out his full sentence, he
was released into house arrest,
surrounded by armed guards and cut off
from the outside world.
Now he was injured, on the run, and
asking for our help. At dawn in Beijing,
two U.S. Embassy officers met in secret
with Chen. With Chinese State Security
hunting for him, he asked if he could take
refuge at the embassy, at least long
enough to receive medical attention and
devise a new plan. They agreed to relay
the request to Washington, where it
quickly made its way up the chain. Chen
continued to circle the Beijing suburbs
in a car, waiting for a response.
A number of factors made this a
particularly difficult decision. First there
were the logistics. Chen had a broken
foot and was a wanted man. If we didn’t
act quickly, he would likely be captured.
To make matters worse, Chinese
security regularly maintained a robust
presence outside our embassy. If Chen
tried to walk up to the front door, they
would surely seize him before we could
even unbolt the lock. The only way to get
him safely inside would be to send a
team out into the streets to quietly pick
him up. Bob Wang, our Deputy Chief of
Mission in Beijing, estimated that
Chen’s chances of getting in on his own
were less than 10 percent. He thought it
was above 90 percent if we went out
and got him. That, however, would
certainly increase tensions with the
Chinese.
Timing was also a factor. As it
happened, I was preparing to depart in
five days for Beijing myself, to
participate in the annual Strategic and
Economic Dialogue with Treasury
Secretary Tim Geithner and our Chinese
counterparts. It was the culmination of
an entire year’s worth of painstaking
diplomatic work, and we had a full
agenda of important and sensitive issues,
including tensions in the South China
Sea, provocations from North Korea,
and economic concerns like currency
valuation and intellectual property theft.
If we agreed to help Chen, there was a
real chance that the Chinese leaders
would be so angry they would cancel the
summit. At the very least we could
expect much less cooperation on matters
of significant strategic importance.
It appeared that I had to decide
between protecting one man, albeit a
highly sympathetic and symbolic figure,
and protecting our relationship with
China. On one side of the scale were
America’s core values and our status as
a beacon of freedom and opportunity; on
the other were many of our most urgent
security and economic priorities.
As I weighed this decision, I thought
of the dissidents who sought refuge in
American Embassies in Communist
countries during the Cold War. One of
them, Cardinal József Mindszenty of
Hungary, stayed for fifteen years. In
1989 Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li
Shuxian, Chinese physicists and
prominent activists during the protests in
Tiananmen Square, spent nearly thirteen
months in the embassy in Beijing before
finally making it to the United States.
This legacy hung over the Chen case
from the beginning.
I also had in mind a much more recent
incident. In February 2012, just two
months earlier, a Chinese police chief
named Wang Lijun walked into the U.S.
Consulate in Chengdu, the capital of the
southwestern province of Sichuan,
looking for help. Until his fall from
grace, Wang had been the right-hand man
of Bo Xilai, the powerful Communist
Party boss of a nearby province. Wang
had helped Bo run a vast network of
corruption and graft. He eventually
claimed to have knowledge of a coverup of the murder of a British
businessman by Bo’s wife. Bo was a
colorful figure and a rising star in the
national Communist Party, but his
spectacular abuses of power, including
the alleged wiretapping of President Hu
Jintao, unnerved his elders in Beijing.
They began investigating both Bo and
Wang. Afraid that he would end up like
the poisoned Brit, Wang fled to our
consulate in Chengdu with a head full of
stories.
While he was inside, security forces
loyal to Bo surrounded the building. It
was a tense moment. Wang Lijun was no
human rights dissident, but we couldn’t
just turn him over to the men outside; that
would effectively have been a death
sentence, and the cover-up would have
continued. We also couldn’t keep him in
the consulate forever. So after asking
Wang what he wanted, we reached out to
the central authorities in Beijing and
suggested that he would voluntarily
surrender into their custody if they
would listen to his testimony. We had no
idea how explosive his story would
prove or how seriously Beijing would
take it. We agreed to say nothing about
the matter, and the Chinese were grateful
for our discretion.
Soon the dominoes started to fall. Bo
was removed from power, and his wife
was convicted of murder. Even the
tightest Chinese censorship couldn’t stop
this from becoming an enormous
scandal, and it shook confidence in the
Communist Party’s leadership at a
sensitive time. President Hu and Premier
Wen were scheduled to hand over
power to a new generation of leaders in
early 2013. They badly wanted a smooth
transition, not a national furor over
official corruption and intrigue.
Now, just two months later, we were
facing another test, and I knew the
Chinese leadership was more on edge
than ever.

I told Jake to set up a conference call
with Kurt Campbell, Deputy Secretary
Bill Burns, and Counselor Cheryl Mills.
Kurt had been coordinating closely with
our embassy in Beijing since Chen first
made contact, and he told me we
probably had less than an hour to make a
decision. The embassy had assembled a
team that was ready to move to an
agreed-upon rendezvous point as soon as
I gave the word. We talked it through
one more time, and then I said, “Go get
him.”
In the end it wasn’t a close call. I
have always believed that, even more
than our military and economic power,
America’s values are the greatest source
of strength and security. This isn’t just
idealism; it’s based on a clear-eyed
evaluation of our strategic position. The
United States had talked about human
rights in China for decades, across
Democratic and Republican
administrations alike. Now our
credibility was on the line, with the
Chinese and also with other countries in
the region and around the world. If we
didn’t help Chen, it would undermine
our position everywhere.
I also was making a calculated
gamble that, as the hosts of the upcoming
summit, the Chinese had invested at least
as much as we had in keeping it on track.
Finally, with the Bo Xilai scandal and
the impending leadership transition, they
had their hands full and wouldn’t have
much appetite for a new crisis. I was
willing to bet that Beijing would not
blow up the entire relationship over this
one incident.
Once I gave the go-ahead, things
started to move fast. Bob Wang departed
the embassy en route to the rendezvous.
Meanwhile it fell to Jake to brief the
White House. He explained my
reasoning and answered skeptical
questions. Some of the President’s aides
worried that we were about to destroy
America’s relationship with China. But
no one was prepared to be responsible
for leaving Chen to his fate by telling us
to stand down. They just wanted me and
the State Department to somehow make
this problem go away.
While Jake was talking to the White
House, a drama right out of a spy novel
was unfolding in the streets of Beijing.
The embassy car arrived at the
rendezvous point, about forty-five
minutes away, and Bob caught sight of
Chen. He also saw Chinese security in
the area. It was now or never. Bob
hustled Chen into the car, threw a jacket
over his head, and sped off. Bob
reported back to Washington with an
update from the car, and we all held our
breath, hoping that they wouldn’t be
stopped before reaching the safety of the
embassy grounds. Finally, at nearly 3
A.M. in Washington, Bob called back
with the good news: the mission was
completed, and Chen was now receiving
medical attention from the embassy
doctor.
Over the course of the next two days,
Bill Burns, Kurt, Cheryl, Jake, and I
discussed what to do next. The first step
was to make contact with the Chinese,
inform them that we had Chen but had
made no determination about his status,
and ask them to meet so we could come
to a resolution before the start of the
summit. We thought that if we could get
them to discuss the matter in good faith,
we were halfway toward a solution.
The second step was to talk with Chen
himself. What did he want exactly? Was
he prepared to spend the next fifteen
years of his life living in the embassy,
like Cardinal Mindszenty?
Once we had plotted our course, I told
Kurt to get on a plane to Beijing as soon
as possible so he could manage the
negotiations in person. He would depart
late on Friday, April 27, arriving before
dawn on Sunday. Bill would follow the
next day. We also recalled Ambassador
Gary Locke from a family vacation in
Bali and tracked down the State
Department Legal Advisor, former Yale
Law School Dean Harold Koh, who
happened to be traveling in a remote part
of China. When Cheryl reached him and
asked how long it would take to get to a
secure line, he said at least four hours.
“Go,” she said. “I’ll explain when you
get there.”
When Kurt touched down in Beijing,
he immediately made his way to the third
floor of the embassy’s Marine barracks.
The Chinese security presence around
the compound had grown significantly
since the day before, and inside it felt
like a siege. Chen appeared frail and
vulnerable. It was hard to believe that
this slight man with the large dark
glasses was at the center of a brewing
international incident.
I was relieved to hear from Kurt that
he found at least a little good news
waiting for him: The Chinese had agreed
to meet. Considering we were talking
about one of their own citizens, picked
up on Chinese soil, that in itself was
promising. What’s more, Chen seemed
to have already bonded with Bob and
some of the other Mandarin-speaking
officers at the embassy, and he was
declaring his firm desire to remain in
China rather than seek asylum or remain
in the barracks forever. Chen talked
about the abuse he suffered at the hands
of the corrupt local authorities in
Shandong and expressed his hope that
the central government in Beijing would
step in and provide justice. He had
special faith in Premier Wen, who had a
reputation for caring about the poor and
disenfranchised. “Grandpa Wen” would
surely help if he only knew what was
really going on.
As we waited anxiously for
negotiations to begin, there was reason
to be cautiously optimistic. What was
not immediately clear in those early
hours was that Chen would turn out to be
unpredictable and quixotic, as
formidable a negotiator as the Chinese
leaders outside.

Kurt’s counterpart on the Chinese side
was an experienced diplomat named Cui
Tiankai, who was later named
Ambassador to the United States. Kurt
and I had agreed that in his first meeting
with Cui, he would start cautiously and
work on establishing some common
ground. There was no way we would
surrender Chen, but I wanted to resolve
this crisis quickly and quietly to protect
the relationship and the summit. Both
sides needed a win-win outcome. At
least that was the plan.
The Chinese were having none of it.
“I’ll tell you how you solve this,” Cui
said. “Turn Chen over to us
immediately. If you really care about the
U.S.-China relationship, that’s what
you’ll do.” Kurt responded carefully,
offering the Chinese the chance to come
to the embassy to talk directly to Chen.
This only made Cui angrier. He launched
into a thirty-minute diatribe about
Chinese sovereignty and dignity,
growing louder and more impassioned
as he went. We were undermining the
relationship and insulting the Chinese
people, and Chen was a coward, hiding
behind American skirts. Over the
following hours and days, our team
endured five more negotiating sessions,
all along the same lines, in ceremonial
rooms at the Foreign Ministry. Behind
Cui, the Chinese side included a number
of senior and quite tense officials from
the state security apparatus. They often
huddled with Cui immediately before
and after the negotiating sessions, but
they never spoke in front of the
Americans. At one point Kurt witnessed
an intense argument between Cui and a
senior security official, but he couldn’t
hear the details. After ten minutes a
frustrated Cui waved his colleague off.
Back at the embassy our team listened
as Chen talked about wanting to study
law and continuing to be an advocate for
reforms inside China. He was familiar
with the stories of exiled dissidents who
lost their influence once they left the
country and lived in safe obscurity in the
United States. That was not what he
wanted. This was a concern Harold Koh
could appreciate. His father, a South
Korean diplomat, had fled Seoul after a
military coup in 1961 and gone into
exile in the United States. Harold spoke
movingly of the difficulties Chen would
face if he decided to leave China.
Besides being one of our nation’s top
legal scholars, Harold was also an
accomplished university administrator,
and his experience there now came to
the fore. He developed a plan that would
get Chen out of the embassy, avoid the
emotionally charged question of asylum,
and provide a face-saving solution for
the Chinese before the start of the
summit. What if Chen was admitted to
study at a Chinese law school,
somewhere away from Beijing, and then,
after a period of time, perhaps two
years, left to pursue his studies at an
American university? Harold had close
ties with professors and administrators
at New York University, which was in
the process of setting up a Shanghai
campus, and overnight he persuaded the
university to offer Chen a fellowship.
That allowed us to present a package
deal to the Chinese.
The Chinese were skeptical but didn’t
reject the proposal out of hand. It
appeared that the Communist Party
leadership was trying to walk a tightrope
between working constructively with us
and salvaging the Strategic and
Economic Dialogue, and satisfying the
concerns of more hard-line elements in
the security apparatus. Eventually orders
came down to Cui: Do what it takes to
get this resolved.
Late in the evening of Monday, April
30, five days after the initial phone call,
I boarded an Air Force jet from
Andrews heading to Beijing. That gave
the negotiators roughly twenty more
hours to nail down the details. It was as
tense a flight as any I can recall. From
the White House the President had sent a
clear message: Don’t screw up.
Slowly the outlines of a deal emerged.
First Chen would be transferred to a
Beijing hospital to receive medical
attention for the injuries he suffered
during his escape. He would then have
the opportunity to tell appropriate
authorities about the abuses he had
suffered under house arrest in Shandong.
Next he would be reunited with his
family, who had faced continued
harassment since his escape. Then he
would leave Beijing for two years of
study elsewhere in China, followed by
possible study in the United States. The
American Embassy would maintain
contact with him every step of the way.
Kurt presented a list of five or six
possible Chinese universities to
consider. Cui scanned the list and
exploded in anger. “There’s no way he’s
going to East China Normal,” Cui
roared. “I will not share an alma mater
with that man!” That meant we were
getting somewhere.
Back at the embassy Chen himself
wasn’t so sure. He wanted to speak with
his family and have them come to
Beijing before making any final
decisions; waiting to be reunited was not
good enough. Kurt dreaded going back
with another request after the Chinese
had already conceded so much, but Chen
was insistent. Sure enough, the Chinese
could not believe it. They were
withering in their criticism of Kurt and
the team and refused to budge. There
was no way Chen’s wife and children
would be allowed to come to Beijing
until the deal was finalized.
We needed to raise the stakes. The
Chinese are famously sensitive to
protocol and respectful of authority. We
decided to use this to our advantage. Bill
Burns was the highest-ranking career
diplomat in the U.S. government, and is
a widely respected former Ambassador
to Jordan and Russia. What’s more, he is
among the calmest and steadiest people
I’ve ever met, qualities that we
desperately needed at the negotiating
table. When he arrived on Monday, he
joined the next session. Sitting across
from Cui, Bill made a soothing and
persuasive case, diplomat to diplomat:
Just deliver the family and move ahead
with the summit, then we can all put this
whole incident behind us. Mollified, Cui
agreed to take the matter back to his
superiors. By midnight, while I was still
somewhere over the Pacific, word came
back that the family would be on the
morning train from Shandong. Now all
we needed was for Chen to walk out the
door.

When my plane touched down early on
May 2, I sent Jake directly to the
embassy with my personal
encouragement to Chen. After the
marathon flight, we had left most of the
day open, and the first official event was
a private dinner that evening with my
Chinese counterpart, State Councilor
Dai Bingguo.
Chen was still nervous. He felt safe in
the Marine barracks, cared for by an
embassy doctor. He had formed a strong
relationship with the staff, especially
Ambassador Gary Locke, the first
Chinese American to serve in that post.
Gary’s grandfather had emigrated from
China to Washington State, where he
found work as a domestic servant,
sometimes in exchange for English
lessons. Gary was born in Seattle, where
his family owned a small grocery store,
and went on to become Governor of
Washington and Secretary of Commerce.
He was a living embodiment of the
American Dream, and I was proud to
have him as our representative at this
delicate time.
Gary and Harold spent hours sitting
with Chen, holding his hand, soothing his
fears, and talking about his hopes for the
future. Twice they arranged for Chen to
talk on the phone with his wife as she
sped toward Beijing by train. Finally
Chen jumped up, full of purpose and
excitement, and said, “Let’s go.” The
long, difficult drama seemed to finally
be coming to an end.
Leaning on the Ambassador’s arm and
clutching Kurt’s hand, Chen emerged
from the barracks and walked slowly to
a waiting van. Once he was safely
inside, Jake dialed me from his cell
phone and handed it to Chen. After so
many stressful days of waiting and
worrying, we had the chance to talk at
last. “I want to kiss you,” he said. At that
moment, I felt the same way about him.
The van arrived at nearby Chaoyang
Hospital to a crush of media and
security. The Chinese were scrupulous
in holding up their end of the bargain:
Chen was reunited with his wife and
children and then whisked off to be
treated by a team of doctors,
accompanied by our embassy staff. I
released a carefully worded press
statement, my first public comment on
the episode, saying, “I am pleased that
we were able to facilitate Chen
Guangcheng’s stay and departure from
the U.S. Embassy in a way that reflected
his choices and our values.” For their
part, the Chinese denounced American
interference in their internal affairs, as
expected, but kept the summit on track
and resisted the temptation to
immediately rearrest Chen.
With Chen safely at the hospital, it
was time for dinner. Dai and Cui
welcomed us to the Wanshousi Temple,
a 16th-century complex of quiet
courtyards and ornate villas that houses
a large collection of ancient artifacts.
Dai proudly gave me a tour, and as we
admired the jade figurines and graceful
calligraphy, the sense of relief was
palpable. As Dai and I liked to do, we
talked expansively about the importance
of the U.S.-China relationship and the
sweep of history. The delegations had
dinner, and then Dai and I went with
Kurt and Cui into a small room for a
private conversation. How long it had
been since Dai had first shown me the
photograph of his grandchild and we had
agreed to work together to make sure
they inherited a peaceful future. Now we
had weathered our toughest crisis yet
and the bonds had held. But Dai couldn’t
resist venting. He told me we had made
a big mistake in trusting Chen, who he
said was a manipulative criminal. Then
he implored me not to raise the episode
when I saw President Hu and Premier
Wen later in the week. We both agreed it
was time to refocus on the urgent
strategic concerns of the summit, from
North Korea to Iran.
Across town a very different
conversation was happening. The
embassy staff had decided to give Chen
and his wife some privacy after their
long ordeal. Now that they were finally
alone in the hospital room, the dissident
and his family began second-guessing
the choice he had made. After so much
mistreatment, how could they trust the
Chinese authorities to honor the deal?
To Chen, the grand idea of staying in
China and remaining relevant, despite
the risks, may have started to seem less
attractive once he was outside the
protection of the embassy walls and with
the loved ones he could potentially be
endangering. He also spoke on the phone
with friends in the human rights
community worried about his safety,
who urged him to get out of the country,
and with reporters who questioned his
decision to stay in China. As the evening
went on, his answers started to change.
Back at the Wanshousi Temple,
troubling press reports starting popping
up on my colleagues’ BlackBerrys. By
the time I emerged from my meeting with
Dai, it was clear something had gone
wrong. Journalists were quoting Chen
from his hospital bed saying he “no
longer felt safe,” that the Americans had
abandoned him, and that he had changed
his mind about remaining in China. He
even denied that he had ever said he
wanted to kiss me! (He later admitted to
the press that “he was embarrassed by
having spoken so intimately” to me.) Our
carefully constructed choreography was
falling apart.
When we arrived back at the hotel I
convened an emergency meeting in my
suite. While Chen seemed to be talking
easily with every reporter and activist
from Beijing to Washington, no one at
the embassy could reach him on the cell
phones that, ironically, we had
provided. We hadn’t heard anything
official yet from the Chinese, but they
were reading the same reports we were,
and security outside the hospital was
growing by the hour. I could just imagine
Dai and Cui preparing to deliver an epic
“I told you so.”
Kurt gallantly offered me his
resignation if things kept getting worse. I
dismissed that out of hand and said we
needed to start working on a revised
plan. First we would put out a statement
right away clarifying that, contrary to
some of the breathless news reports,
Chen had never asked for asylum and
had certainly never been denied.
Second, if in the morning Chen was still
insisting that he wanted to go to the
United States, we had to find a way to
reengage the Chinese government, no
matter how difficult and painful that
would be, and negotiate a new deal. We
couldn’t afford to let this issue fester in
public and overwhelm the summit.
Third, I would carry on with the
scheduled Strategic and Economic
Dialogue events as if nothing had
happened, in keeping with my
understanding with Dai. With their
marching orders in hand, my troops filed
out of the suite looking worried and
beyond tired. None of us would sleep
much that night.

The next day was a surreal exercise in
diplomatic multitasking. Thanks to
elaborate measures the government had
taken in advance of the summit, the
normally clogged streets and polluted air
of Beijing were clearer than normal as
our motorcade sped through the city that
morning. But the road ahead was far
from clear. A lot was riding on the next
few hours.
We arrived at Diaoyutai, the
sprawling complex of traditional
guesthouses, gardens, and meeting
rooms. It was here in 1971 that Henry
Kissinger first negotiated with Zhou
Enlai, laying the groundwork for
President Nixon’s historic visit,
normalization, and everything that
followed. It was also here, during our
2010 meetings, that an intemperate
outburst by a Chinese admiral had
exposed the deep rifts of mistrust that
still divide our countries. I wondered,
given the current predicament, which of
those two spirits our Chinese hosts
would be channeling.
The answer came as soon as the first
formal speeches began. Dai and the
other Chinese leaders were clearly
working just as hard as Tim Geithner
and I were to project a sense of
normalcy and calm. They repeated their
standard talking points about China’s
harmonious rise and the importance of
other countries staying out of their
internal affairs—statements that, while
familiar, took on a bit more edge in light
of recent events. When it was my turn, I
avoided the Chen issue and focused on
Iran, North Korea, Syria, and the long
list of other challenges on which we
needed Chinese cooperation. But, I
added, “a China that protects the rights
of all its citizens will be a stronger and
more prosperous nation, and of course, a
stronger partner on behalf of our
common goals.” That was as close as I
got that morning to the current crisis.
Following the speeches, we moved
into smaller groups to dive into the
agenda in more detail. Even if our minds
often wandered to the drama unfolding in
a hospital room across town, this was a
chance to work on important business,
and we couldn’t afford to waste it. So I
sat through hours of presentations and
discussions, asking questions and raising
concerns.
Kurt, meanwhile, was constantly
excusing himself so he could monitor
developments with Chen. The news
wasn’t good. The embassy still couldn’t
get through to his cell phone, and the
Chinese were limiting physical access to
the hospital. Protesters popped up
outside, some wearing Chen-style dark
glasses in homage to their hero, and
Chinese security was getting
increasingly anxious. None of that,
however, was stopping Chen from
talking with American journalists, who
kept trumpeting his new desire to leave
China and go to the United States and
questioning whether we had done enough
to help him.
Back home, with election-year
politics swirling, Washington was in an
uproar. Republican Speaker of the
House John Boehner proclaimed himself
“deeply disturbed” by reports that Chen
was “pressured to leave the U.S.
embassy against his will amid flimsy
promises and possible threats of harm to
his family.” Former Massachusetts
Governor Mitt Romney, the Republican
Presidential candidate, went even
further. He said it was “a dark day for
freedom” and “a day of shame for the
Obama Administration.” I don’t know if
the critics were aware that we had done
what Chen said he wanted every step of
the way. The White House went into full
damage-control mode. The guidance to
us in Beijing was simple: Fix this.
I told Kurt and Ambassador Locke to
restart negotiations with Cui
immediately and try to get Chen out of
the country. That was easier said than
done. The Chinese were absolutely
incredulous that we would seek to
reopen a deal that they hadn’t wanted in
the first place. Cui just shook his head.
He said that Kurt should “go back to
Washington and resign.” Meanwhile
Chen took his outreach to another level.
Although he still had not spoken with
anyone at the U.S. Embassy, he managed
to call in to a Congressional hearing
back in Washington. An activist close to
Chen, Bob Fu, put his iPhone on speaker
in front of Congressman Chris Smith’s
committee. “I fear for my family’s
lives,” Chen said, and then repeated his
request to travel to the United States. It
was like throwing fuel on the political
fire.
It was time for me to step in. If Cui
refused to negotiate, I would put aside
the pantomime and raise the issue
directly with Dai. Would our years of
relationship-building pay off? On Friday
I was scheduled to meet with President
Hu and Premier Wen in the Great Hall of
the People, and it was important to both
Dai and me that those encounters go
smoothly. It was in both our interests to
get this resolved.
On the morning of May 4, I met with
Dai and thanked him for China honoring
its side of the agreement. Then I
explained the political firestorm back
home and the difficulties it was causing
us. Dai seemed surprised as I described
the circus at the Congressional hearing.
Nothing like that ever happened in
China. What to do now? I offered what I
hoped would be a face-saving solution.
In the original understanding, Chen was
supposed to go to school in China for a
period of time and then continue his
studies at an American university.
Moving up that timetable wouldn’t mean
a whole new deal; it would simply be a
refinement of the existing agreement. Dai
stared at me quietly for a long while, and
I wondered what thoughts were racing
behind his stoic demeanor. Slowly he
turned to Cui, who was visibly agitated,
and directed him to try to work out the
details with Kurt.
Heartened, but not yet confident, I
headed off to the Great Hall of the
People for my meetings with the senior
leaders. True to my word, I did not raise
Chen with Hu or later with Wen. I didn’t
need to. In our discussions they
appeared distracted but pleasant. We
mostly talked in circles, dancing around
the big issues facing the future of our
relationship, while our aides were
scurrying around trying to find a way out
of our common dilemma. Hu and Wen
were coming to the end of their ten-year
term, and we too were headed into an
election that could reshape our own
government. But even if the players
changed, the game would remain
fundamentally the same.
I left the Great Hall of the People and
crossed Tiananmen Square to the
National Museum of China for a
dialogue about educational and cultural
exchanges with State Councilor Liu
Yandong, the highest-ranking woman in
the Chinese government. The daughter of
a former Vice Minister of Agriculture
with deep ties in the Communist Party,
Madame Liu rose to become one of only
two women to hold a seat in the
politburo. We had developed a warm
relationship over the years, and I was
glad to see a friendly face at a tense
time.
Beijing’s National Museum is
enormous, designed to rival the Great
Hall across the square, but its collection
has never fully recovered from the
removal of many of China’s most
precious art and artifacts to Taiwan by
the retreating forces of Generalissimo
Chiang Kai-shek in 1948. That’s the kind
of wound to national pride that takes a
long time to heal. As we walked up the
soaring front steps, Kurt turned to me
and asked, “Do you feel like we’ve done
the right thing?” It was a reasonable
question after so much high-stakes
diplomacy and nerve-wracking twists
and turns. I looked back at him and said,
“There are a lot of decisions I make in
this job that give me a pit in my stomach.
I don’t have any of that here. This is a
small price to pay to be the United States
of America.” It was what Kurt needed to
hear, and it happened to be the truth.
Inside the museum we were met by a
large group of Chinese and American
children waving flags and offering
greetings. Upstairs a chorus of Chinese
and American students sang two songs of
welcome, one in English, the other in
Mandarin. Finally two exchange students
stepped forward to speak about their
experiences studying abroad. An
articulate young Chinese woman talked
in English about living in New York, an
eye-opening, horizon-expanding,
ambition-inspiring journey into an
America she had only read about. The
young American man was just as
eloquent, describing his studies in China
in Mandarin and how it had helped him
better understand the relationship
between our two countries.
Occasionally, amid all the diplomatic
pomp and circumstance of these
summits, with their prepared speeches
and choreographed set pieces, an actual
human moment breaks through and
reminds us of what we’re doing there in
the first place. This was one of those
moments. Listening to the students
express so much empathy and
excitement, I thought about all the effort
we had put into what some critics
dismiss as the “softer” side of
diplomacy: the educational exchanges,
cultural tours, and scientific
collaboration. I had made it a priority to
send more American students to China,
with the goal of 100,000 over four years,
in part because I believed it would help
convince wary Chinese officials that we
were serious about expanding
engagement with them. These programs
may garner few headlines, but they have
the potential to influence the next
generation of U.S. and Chinese leaders
in a way no other initiative can match. If
these students were any indication, it
was working. I looked across the table
at Liu, Cui, and the others, and I knew
they could feel it too.
When Cui sat down with Kurt and his
team after lunch to work out the next
moves in the Chen drama, his tone was
noticeably different. Despite our
differences, we were working together
to save the relationship and the future
those two students represented.
Afterward Kurt and Jake raced to put
down on paper a short and carefully
worded statement that would not
acknowledge an explicit deal but would
make it clear that an understanding had
been reached. Chen, as a Chinese citizen
in good standing, would apply for a visa
to the United States, and it would be
processed expeditiously by both sides.
He could then take his family and begin
his studies at New York University.

Back at Diaoyutai, Tim Geithner and I
joined our counterparts onstage for the
closing public remarks of the Strategic
and Economic Dialogue. In my
comments I reviewed the substantive
ground that had been covered over the
past few days. I noted that there had
been a number of strong disagreements,
but that four years of hard work had
allowed us to develop a level of trust
durable enough to withstand disruptions
and distractions. I quoted a bit of Taoist
wisdom that roughly translates as “To
lead, one must see the larger picture.”
We had tried to do that in this crisis and
not lose sight of either the strategic
concerns or our core values. Looking
ahead, I told the audience, “We need to
build a resilient relationship that allows
both of us to thrive and meet our
regional and global responsibilities
without unhealthy competition, rivalry,
or conflict. Zero-sum thinking will lead
only to negative-sum results.”
As a rule Chinese leaders refuse to
take questions at these closing “press
conferences,” so after the formal
statements, Tim Geithner and I drove
back to our hotel for our first proper
session with the world media since
arriving in Beijing. The first question,
from Matt Lee of the Associated Press,
was predictable. “Madam Secretary, it
won’t surprise you, I think, to get the
questions that you’re about to get from
me, which all have to do with the
elephant in the room that’s been dogging
us,” he began. I smiled at his mixed
metaphor: “The elephant that has been
dogging us. That’s good—a good start,
Matt.” Laughter broke the tension in the
room, just a bit. He pressed ahead:
“How did the Chinese officials that you
spoke to, the senior leadership, respond
to your appeals on [Chen’s] behalf? Are
you confident that they will allow him to
leave the country to go to the States with
his family so that he can study? And how
do you respond to critics at home and
elsewhere who say that the
administration has really bungled this?”
It was finally time to put this drama to
rest once and for all. I began with the
carefully prepared text we had agreed to
with the Chinese and then added a few
thoughts of my own:
Let me start by saying that from
the beginning, all of our efforts
with Mr. Chen have been guided
by his choices and our values. And
I’m pleased that today our
ambassador has spoken with him
again, our Embassy staff and our
doctor had a chance to meet with
him, and he confirms that he and
his family now want to go to the
United States so he can pursue his
studies. In that regard, we are
also encouraged by the official
statement issued today by the
Chinese Government confirming
that he can apply to travel abroad
for this purpose. Over the course
of the day, progress has been
made to help him have the future
that he wants, and we will be
staying in touch with him as this
process moves forward. But let me
also add, this is not just about
well-known activists. It’s about
the human rights and aspirations
of more than a billion people here
in China and billions more around
the world. And it’s about the
future of this great nation and all
nations. We will continue
engaging with the Chinese
Government at the highest levels
in putting these concerns at the
heart of our diplomacy.
As the cameras snapped away and the
reporters scribbled in their notebooks, I
felt good about this resolution. After the
press conference I invited my team to a
well-deserved celebratory dinner of
Peking duck and other Chinese
delicacies. Kurt and Harold recounted
some of their more absurd
misadventures over the past week, and
we finally felt comfortable relaxing and
laughing. The next day, I headed to the
airport and boarded a flight to Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
Chen was still in his hospital room,
and we all knew there was a real chance
this second deal would unravel just like
the first. None of us would be truly
comfortable until he was safely on
American soil. Based on the
understanding with the Chinese, that
could take a number of weeks. But the
Chinese had held up their side of the
bargain throughout the crisis, and I
believed they would do so again. Sure
enough, on May 19 Chen and his family
arrived in the United States to begin his
fellowship at New York University.

I was immensely proud of my team and
everyone at the embassy in Beijing. This
was about much more than one man. We
had spent four years preparing for a
crisis like this—building up the
Strategic and Economic Dialogue and
other diplomatic mechanisms,
developing habits of trust between
counterparts up and down the chain,
grounding the U.S.-China relationship in
a framework of mutual interest and
respect, while also staking out clear
markers about human rights and
democratic values. It had been a delicate
tightrope walk from the start, but now I
felt we had proof that it had been worth
it. We also had reason to believe our
relationship was strong enough to
withstand future crises. Given our
different visions, values, and interests,
they were inevitable.
One of the primary goals of the pivot
plan was to increase our active
involvement in Asian affairs in a way
that advanced our interests in a more
open democratic and prosperous region,
without weakening our efforts to build a
positive relationship with China. The
frictions in our relationship are a
reflection of both disagreements over the
issues at hand and very different
perceptions of how the world, or at least
Asia, should work. The United States
wants a future of shared prosperity and
shared responsibilities for peace and
security. The only way to build that
future is to develop mechanisms for and
habits of cooperation and to urge China
toward greater openness and freedom.
That’s why we oppose China’s
suppression of internet freedom,
political activists like Chen, and the
Tibetan and Uighur Muslim minorities.
It’s why we want peaceful resolutions
between China and its neighbors over
their territorial claims.
The Chinese believe we don’t
appreciate how far they’ve come and
how much they’ve changed, or how deep
and constant is their fear of internal
conflicts and disintegration. They resent
criticism by outsiders. They claim the
Chinese people are more free than they
have ever been, free to work, to move,
to save and accumulate wealth. They are
rightly proud of moving more people out
of poverty faster than any other nation in
history. They believe our relationship
should be formed on mutual self-interest
and noninvolvement in each other’s
affairs.
When we disagree, they believe it’s
because we fear China’s rise on the
world stage and want to contain it. We
believe disagreement is a normal part of
our relationship and think if we can
manage our differences it will strengthen
our cooperation. We have no interest in
containing China. But we do insist that
China play by the rules that bind all
nations.
In other words, the jury’s still out.
China has some hard choices to make,
and so do we. We should follow a timetested strategy: Work for the best
outcome, but plan for something less.
And stick to our values. As I told Kurt
and Jake on that first tense night when
Chen was pleading for refuge, our
defense of universal human rights is one
of America’s greatest sources of
strength. The image of Chen, blind and
injured, seeking through that dangerous
night for the one place he knew stood for
freedom and opportunity—the embassy
of the United States—reminds us of our
responsibility to make sure our country
remains the beacon for dissidents and
dreamers all over the world.
6

Burma: The Lady and
the Generals

She was thin, even frail, but with
unmistakable inner strength. There was a
quiet dignity about her, and the coiled
intensity of a vibrant mind inside a longimprisoned body. She exhibited qualities
I had glimpsed before in other former
political prisoners, including Nelson
Mandela and Václav Havel. Like them,
she carried the hopes of a nation on her
shoulders.
The first time I met Aung San Suu Kyi,
on December 1, 2011, we were both
wearing white. It seemed like an
auspicious coincidence. After so many
years of reading and thinking about this
celebrated Burmese dissident, we were
finally face-to-face. She had been
released from house arrest, and I had
traveled thousands of miles to talk with
her about the prospects of democratic
reform in her authoritarian country. We
sat down for a private dinner on the
terrace of the chief U.S. diplomat’s
residence in Rangoon, a lovely old
colonial home on Inya Lake. I felt as if
we had known each other for a lifetime,
even though we had just met.
I had a lot of questions. She had just
as many. After years as an icon of the
pro-democracy movement, she was
preparing for her first experience with
actual democracy. How does one move
from protest to politics? What is it like
to run for office and put yourself on the
line in a whole new way? The
conversation was easy and open, and
soon we were chatting, strategizing, and
laughing like old friends.
We both knew it was a delicate
moment. Her country, which the ruling
generals called Myanmar and the
dissidents called Burma, was taking the
first tentative steps toward momentous
change. (For years our government
maintained a strict official policy of
using only the name Burma, but
eventually some began using the two
names interchangeably. In this book I use
Burma, as I did at the time.) The country
could easily fall backward into
bloodshed and repression, as had
happened before. Yet if we could help
chart the right course, the prospects for
progress were better than at any time in
a generation.
For the United States, the chance to
help Burma move from dictatorship to
democracy and rejoin the family of
nations was tantalizing. On its own,
Burma was worth the effort; its millions
of people deserved a chance to enjoy the
blessings of freedom and prosperity.
There were also outsized strategic
implications. Burma was situated at the
heart of Southeast Asia, a region where
the United States and China were both
working to increase influence. A
meaningful reform process there could
become a milestone of our pivot
strategy, give a boost to democracy and
human rights activists across Asia and
beyond, and provide a rebuke to
authoritarian government. If we failed,
however, it could have the opposite
effect. There was a risk that the Burmese
generals were playing us. They might be
hoping that a few modest gestures would
be enough to crack their international
isolation without changing much of
anything on the ground. At home, many
thoughtful observers believed I was
making the wrong choice by reaching out
when the situation was so unclear. I had
my eyes open about the risks, but when I
weighed all the factors, I didn’t see how
we could pass up this opportunity.
For two hours Suu Kyi and I sat and
talked. She wanted to know how
America would respond to reforms the
regime was considering. I told her that
we were committed to match action for
action. There were many carrots we
could offer, from restoring full
diplomatic relations to easing sanctions
and spurring investment. But we needed
to see more political prisoners released,
credible elections, protections for
minorities and human rights, an end to
military ties with North Korea, and a
pathway to ending the long-running
ethnic conflicts in the countryside. Every
move we made, I assured her, would be
aimed at nurturing further progress.
Suu Kyi was clear-eyed about the
challenges ahead and the men who
controlled her country. Her father, Aung
San, a general himself, had led Burma’s
successful fight for independence from
the British and Japanese, only to be
assassinated in 1947 by political rivals.
Suu Kyi was first imprisoned in July
1989, less than a year after entering
politics during a failed democratic
uprising against the military the previous
year. She had been in and out of house
arrest ever since. In 1990, when the
military allowed an election, her
political party won a resounding victory.
The generals promptly nullified the vote.
The next year she won the Nobel Peace
Prize, which was accepted on her behalf
by her husband, Dr. Michael Aris, an
Oxford professor and leading scholar of
Tibetan Buddhism, as well as their sons.
During her years of house arrest Suu Kyi
was able to see her family only a handful
of times, and when Aris was diagnosed
with prostate cancer, the Burmese
government denied him a visa to come
spend his final days with her. Instead
they suggested that Suu Kyi leave the
country, which she suspected would
mean permanent exile. She declined and
never had a chance to say good-bye.
Aris died in 1999.
Suu Kyi had learned to be skeptical of
good intentions and had developed a
thoroughgoing pragmatism that belied
her idealistic image. The possibility of a
democratic opening was real, she
thought, but it needed to be carefully
tested. We agreed to meet again the next
day to dig into more details, this time at
her home.
As we parted I had to pinch myself.
When I became Secretary of State in
2009, few could have imagined that this
visit would be possible. Only two years
before, in 2007, the world had watched
in horror as Burmese soldiers fired into
crowds of saffron-clad monks who were
peacefully protesting against the regime.
Now the country was on the brink of a
new era. It was a reminder of how fast
the world can change and how important
it is for the United States to be ready to
meet and help shape that change when it
comes.

Burma is a nation of close to 60 million
people strategically located between the
Indian subcontinent and the Mekong
delta region of Southeast Asia. It was
once known as “the rice bowl of Asia,”
and its ancient pagodas and lush beauty
captured the imagination of travelers and
writers like Rudyard Kipling and
George Orwell. During World War II it
was a battleground between Japanese
and Allied forces. A sharp-tongued
American general nicknamed “Vinegar
Joe” Stilwell helped reopen the famed
Burma Road as a vital supply route into
China, and the wartime leadership of
Suu Kyi’s father helped to ensure
Burmese independence following the
end of the conflict.
Decades of military dictatorship and
economic mismanagement turned the
country into a poverty-stricken pariah.
Now Burma ranked among the world’s
worst abusers of human rights. It was a
source of instability and hostility in the
heart of Southeast Asia, and its growing
narcotics trade and military ties with
North Korea represented a threat to
global security.
For me, the road to Rangoon began
with an unusual meeting on Capitol Hill
in January 2009. I knew Mitch
McConnell reasonably well after eight
years together in the Senate, and we
rarely saw eye to eye on anything. The
conservative Republican Minority
Leader from Kentucky made no secret of
his intention to oppose the new Obama
Administration on virtually our entire
agenda. (At one point he said, “The
single most important thing we want to
achieve is for President Obama to be a
one-term president.”) But there was one
area of foreign policy where I thought
we might be able to work together.
Senator McConnell had been a
passionate champion of the prodemocracy movement in Burma since the
brutal 1988 crackdown. Over the years
he led the fight for sanctions against
Burma’s military regime and developed
contacts in the dissident community,
including with Suu Kyi herself.
I came into office convinced that we
needed to rethink our Burma policy, and
I wondered if Senator McConnell would
agree. In 2008 the regime had announced
a new constitution and plans to hold
elections in 2010. After the failure of the
1990 elections, few observers took the
prospects of a new vote very seriously.
Suu Kyi was still barred from holding
office, and the generals had written the
rules to ensure that the military was
guaranteed to hold at least a quarter of
the seats in Parliament, and likely the
vast majority. But even the most modest
gesture toward democracy was an
interesting development from such a
repressive regime.
To be sure, there had been moments of
false hope before. In 1995 the regime
had unexpectedly released Suu Kyi from
house arrest, and Madeleine Albright,
then U.S. Ambassador to the UN, had
flown to Rangoon to see if the military
might be ready to loosen its grip. She
carried with her a poster from the UN
Women’s Conference in Beijing that I
and others had signed. But reforms
proved elusive. In 1996, while visiting
neighboring Thailand, I gave a speech at
Chiang Mai University calling for “real
political dialogue between Aung San
Suu Kyi and the military regime.”
Instead, starting in 1997, the generals
began sharply restricting Suu Kyi’s
movements and political activities, and
by 2000 she was back under house
arrest. Bill recognized her heroism by
awarding her America’s highest civilian
award, the Presidential Medal of
Freedom, which she of course could not
accept in person. Engagement, for the
moment, had failed. But by 2009, it was
hard to argue that our policy of isolation
and sanctions was working any better.
Was there anything else we could do?
I told Senator McConnell I wanted to
take a fresh look at our Burma policy,
from top to bottom, and I hoped he’d be
part of it. He was skeptical but
ultimately supportive. Our policy review
would have bipartisan backing. The
Senator proudly showed me a framed
note from Suu Kyi that he kept on the
wall of his office. It was clear how
personal this issue had become for him. I
promised to consult him regularly as we
moved forward.
There was one more Senator I needed
to see. Jim Webb was a decorated
Vietnam veteran, Secretary of the Navy
under President Reagan, and now a
Democratic Senator from Virginia and
chair of the Senate Foreign Relations
Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific
Affairs. He was feisty and
unconventional, with strong views about
U.S. policy in Southeast Asia. Jim told
me that Western sanctions had
succeeded in impoverishing Burma but
that the ruling regime had only become
more entrenched and paranoid. He was
also concerned that we were
inadvertently creating an opportunity for
China to expand its economic and
political influence in the country.
Chinese companies were investing
heavily in dams, mines, and energy
projects across Burma, including a
major new pipeline. Jim thought a
Burma policy review was a good idea,
but he wasn’t interested in going slowly.
He pushed me to be creative and
assertive and promised to do the same
from his perch on the subcommittee.
I also heard from the other side of the
Capitol, where my friend Congressman
Joe Crowley of New York had long
been a leading proponent of sanctions
against the regime. Joe is an old-school
straight shooter from Queens. When I
was in the Senate and we’d run into each
other at New York events, he’d serenade
me with Irish ballads. He had been
inspired by his mentor on the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, the late,
great Tom Lantos, to champion human
rights in Burma. His support and advice
would also be crucial as we moved
forward.
On my first trip to Asia, in February
2009, I consulted with regional leaders
for their thoughts on Burma.
The most encouraging was Indonesian
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
He told me that he had talked to the
Burmese generals and came away
convinced that progress was possible.
That carried weight with me since he
himself had been a general who took off
the uniform and ran for office. What’s
more, he reported that the regime might
be interested in starting a dialogue with
the United States. We had not had an
Ambassador in Burma in years, but there
were still channels through which we
occasionally communicated. The
prospect of more robust discussions was
intriguing.
In March I sent Stephen Blake, a
senior diplomat and Director of the State
Department’s Office for Mainland
Southeast Asia, to Burma. In a show of
good faith, the regime offered Blake a
rare meeting with the Foreign Minister.
In return Blake agreed to be the first
American official to travel from
Rangoon to Nay Pyi Taw, a new capital
city the military had built in a remote
part of the jungle in 2005; according to a
widely circulated rumor, the site was
chosen on the advice of an astrologer.
He was not allowed to meet Suu Kyi,
however, or the country’s aging and
reclusive senior general, Than Shwe.
Blake came home convinced that the
regime was indeed interested in a
dialogue and that some in the leadership
were chafing at the country’s deep
isolation. But he was skeptical that it
would lead to real progress anytime
soon.
Then, in May, came one of those
unpredictable quirks of history that can
reshape international relations. A fiftythree-year-old Vietnam veteran from
Missouri named John Yettaw had
become obsessed with Suu Kyi. In
November 2008 he had traveled to
Rangoon and swam across Inya Lake to
the house where she was imprisoned.
Avoiding police boats and security
guards, Yettaw climbed over a fence and
reached the house undetected. Suu Kyi’s
housekeepers were aghast when they
found him. No unauthorized visitors
were allowed at the house, and Yettaw’s
presence put them all in danger.
Reluctantly he agreed to leave without
seeing Suu Kyi.
But the next spring Yettaw was back.
He had lost seventy pounds, and his exwife reportedly feared he was suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder. Yet
in early May 2009 he made the swim
across Inya Lake again. This time he
refused to leave and claimed to be
exhausted and in poor health. Suu Kyi
allowed him to sleep on the floor and
then contacted the authorities. Yettaw
was arrested at about 5:30 A.M. on May
6, as he attempted to swim back across
the lake. Suu Kyi and her housekeepers
were picked up the following week for
violating the terms of her house arrest.
Yettaw was eventually convicted and
sentenced to seven years of hard labor.
Suu Kyi and her staff were given three
years, which was immediately
commuted by Than Shwe to eighteen
months of continued house arrest. That
would ensure she remained imprisoned
for the promised 2010 elections.
“Everyone is very angry with this
wretched American. He is the cause of
all these problems. He’s a fool,” one of
Suu Kyi’s lawyers told the press.
When I heard the news, I too was
furious. Suu Kyi and the progress we
desperately hoped to see in Burma
should not have to pay the price for the
reckless actions of one misguided
American. Still, because he was an
American citizen, I had a responsibility
to help him. I called Senator Webb and
Senator McConnell to strategize. Jim
offered to go to Burma to negotiate
Yettaw’s release, and I agreed. It was
certainly worth a try.
In mid-June, there was another
potentially explosive event. The U.S.
Navy began tracking a 2,000-ton North
Korean cargo freighter that we and our
South Korean allies suspected carried
military equipment, including rocket
launchers and possible missile parts,
bound for Burma. If true, this would be a
direct violation of the ban on North
Korean arms trafficking imposed by the
UN Security Council in response to a
nuclear test in May. Reports swirled of
contacts between the Burmese military
and a North Korean company with
expertise in nuclear technology and of
secret visits by engineers and scientists.
The Pentagon dispatched a destroyer
to shadow the North Korean freighter as
it sailed through international waters.
The UN resolution empowered us to
search the ship, but the North Koreans
vowed to take that as an act of war. We
reached out to other countries in the
region, including China, looking for
assistance. It was crucial that every port
where the ship might stop along the way
enforce the UN edict and thoroughly
inspect the cargo. Chinese Foreign
Minister Yang agreed that the resolution
“should be carried out in a strict manner
so that a strong unified message can be
sent to the North Koreans.” At the last
minute, the North Koreans blinked; the
ship turned around and went home.
In August Senator Webb went to Nay
Pyi Taw. This time Than Shwe agreed to
meet. Jim had three items on his agenda.
First, he asked to bring Yettaw home on
humanitarian grounds. The man was
refusing to eat and suffering from a
number of ailments. Second, he wanted
to meet Suu Kyi, which Blake had not
been allowed to do. Third, he urged
Than Shwe to end her house arrest and
allow her to participate in the political
process; that was the only way the
upcoming elections would be taken
seriously. Than Shwe listened carefully
and did not betray his thinking. But in the
end Jim got two of his three requests. He
went to Rangoon and met with Suu Kyi.
Then he flew to Thailand with Yettaw
on board a U.S. Air Force jet. When Jim
and I spoke on the phone, I could hear
the relief in his voice. But Suu Kyi
remained imprisoned.
The next month I announced the results
of our Burma policy review at the
United Nations in New York. Our
objectives had not changed: we wanted
to see credible democratic reforms; the
immediate, unconditional release of
political prisoners, including Aung San
Suu Kyi; and serious dialogue with the
opposition and minority ethnic groups.
But we had concluded that “engagement
versus sanctions is a false choice.” So
going forward, we would use both tools
to pursue our goals and reach out
directly to senior Burmese officials.

Over the next year there was
discouragingly little progress. Suu Kyi
remained under house arrest, although
she was permitted to meet twice with
Kurt Campbell. She described her
solitary life to Kurt, including a daily
ritual of listening to the BBC World
Service and Voice of America to learn
about events beyond her prison walls.
The state-run newspaper cropped her out
of the photo of Kurt that ran after his
visit.
Unlike in 1990, there was no prodemocracy landslide in the 2010
elections. Instead the military-backed
party claimed an overwhelming victory,
as expected. Opposition groups and
international human rights organizations
joined the U.S. in condemning the vote
as largely fraudulent. The regime refused
to allow journalists or outside observers
to monitor the election. It was all
depressingly familiar and predictable.
The generals had missed an opportunity
to begin a transition toward democracy
and national reconciliation. Meanwhile
the Burmese people were falling deeper
into poverty and isolation.
Though the election results were
disappointing, a week after the vote in
November 2010, the generals
unexpectedly released Suu Kyi from
house arrest. Then Than Shwe decided
to retire, to be replaced by another highranking general, Thein Sein, who had
previously served as Prime Minister. He
would put away his uniform and lead a
nominally civilian government. Unlike
other members of the regime, Thein Sein
had traveled around the region, was well
known to Asian diplomats, and had seen
firsthand how Burma’s neighbors were
enjoying the benefits of trade and
technology while his own country
stagnated. Rangoon had once been one of
the more cosmopolitan cities in
Southeast Asia; Thein Sein knew just
how far it now lagged behind places like
Bangkok, Jakarta, Singapore, and Kuala
Lumpur. According to the World Bank,
in 2010 only 0.2 percent of the country’s
population used the internet.
Smartphones were nonexistent because
there was insufficient cellular service.
The contrast to their neighbors could not
have been starker.
In January 2011 I called the newly
released Aung San Suu Kyi for the first
time to see what she made of these
developments. It was a thrill to finally
hear her voice, and she seemed
energized by her new freedom. She
thanked me for the firm support that the
United States and Presidents of both
parties had given her over the years and
asked about my daughter’s wedding. Her
political party was stepping up its
organizing, testing the limits of the
government’s new tone, and I told her
we wanted to help and were prepared to
share lessons from other pro-democracy
movements around the world. “I hope I
can visit you one day,” I said. “Or even
better, you can come visit me!”
That spring Thein Sein was formally
sworn in as Burma’s President.
Surprisingly, he invited Suu Kyi to
dinner in his modest home. It was a
remarkable gesture from the most
powerful man in the country to the
woman the military had long feared as
one of their gravest enemies. Thein
Sein’s wife prepared the meal, and they
ate under a painting of Suu Kyi’s father.
They would meet again that summer, in
Nay Pyi Taw. The first conversations
were tentative. The general and the
dissident were both understandably
wary of each other. But something was
definitely happening.
I wanted the United States to play a
constructive role in encouraging the
better instincts of the new Burmese
government, without rushing to embrace
them prematurely or losing the leverage
our strong sanctions provided. Formally
returning a U.S. Ambassador to the
country would be too much too soon, but
we did need a new diplomatic channel
to start testing Thein Sein’s intentions. In
our strategy sessions I asked Kurt and
his team to get creative and develop
various scenarios for our next steps. We
appointed a veteran Asia expert named
Derek Mitchell as the first Special
Representative for Burma. Congress had
created the position in legislation
introduced by the late Congressman Tom
Lantos in 2007 and signed into law by
President Bush in 2008, but it had never
been filled. Selecting a Special
Representative to Burma would not
confer the prestige of installing a
permanent Ambassador, but it would
open the door to better communications.

The Irrawaddy River cuts through Burma
from north to south and has long been at
the heart of the country’s culture and
commerce. George Orwell recalled it
“glittering like diamonds in the patches
that caught the sun,” bounded by vast
stretches of rice paddies. Bundles of
teak logs, a major Burmese export, float
down the river from inland forests all
the way to the sea. Fed by glaciers in the
eastern Himalayas, the Irrawaddy’s
waters run through countless canals and
irrigation systems, feeding farms and
villages up and down the country and
across its wide and fertile delta. Like the
Ganges in India and the Mekong in
Vietnam, the Irrawaddy occupies a
revered place in Burmese society. In the
words of Suu Kyi, it is “the grand
natural highway, a prolific source of
food, the home of varied water flora and
fauna, the supporter of traditional modes
of life, the muse that has inspired
countless works of prose and poetry.”
None of this stopped a state-run
Chinese electric power company from
using Beijing’s long-standing
relationship with the ruling generals to
win permission to build the first
hydroelectric dam across the upper
Irrawaddy. The massive project
threatened to cause lots of damage to the
local economy and ecosystem, but it held
significant benefits for China. Along
with six other Chinese-built dams in
northern Burma, the Myitsone Dam, as it
became known, would deliver
electricity to energy-thirsty cities in
southern China. By 2011 Chinese
construction workers in hard hats had
descended on the banks of the
Irrawaddy’s headwaters in the remote
northern hills that are home to the
separatist Kachin ethnic group. The
Chinese began blasting, tunneling, and
building. Thousands of villagers living
nearby were relocated.
In a country long ruled by capricious
autocrats, such a disruptive project
wasn’t particularly surprising. What was
surprising was the reaction from the
public. From the beginning, local Kachin
groups had opposed the dam, but soon
criticism spread to other areas of the
country and even appeared in heavily
censored newspapers. Activists got their
hands on a nine-hundred-page
environmental impact statement
conducted by Chinese scientists that
warned about damage to downstream
fish and other wildlife, as well as
proximity to a major seismic fault line,
and questioned the necessity and
wisdom of the project. Anger over
ecological damage to the sacred
Irrawaddy tapped into deep-seated
popular resentment toward China, the
military regime’s main foreign patron.
As we’ve seen in other authoritarian
states, nationalism is often harder to
censor than dissent.
A wave of unprecedented public
outrage built across Burma. In August
2011 Suu Kyi, who had kept a relatively
low profile since her release from house
arrest, published an open letter
criticizing the dam. The new, nominally
civilian government appeared divided
and caught off guard. The Information
Minister, a retired general, held a press
conference and tearfully pledged to
protect the Irrawaddy. But other senior
officials dismissed public concerns and
insisted that the dam would continue as
planned. Finally Thein Sein addressed
the matter in Parliament. The government
had been elected by the people, he said,
so it had a responsibility to answer the
concerns of the public. Construction on
the controversial dam would be halted.
This was the most compelling
evidence yet that the new government
might be serious about reforms. It was
also a surprising official repudiation of
China, where the news was met with
consternation.
I marveled at the success of Burma’s
emerging civil society, which had been
persecuted for so long and prevented
from organizing or speaking freely. The
use of the Myitsone Dam as a
galvanizing issue reminded me of a
wonderful insight from Eleanor
Roosevelt. “Where, after all, do
universal human rights begin?” she
asked in a 1958 speech to the United
Nations, and then gave her answer: “In
small places, close to home,” in “the
world of the individual person; the
neighborhood he lives in; the school or
college he attends; the factory, farm, or
office where he works. . . . Without
concerted citizen action to uphold them
close to home, we shall look in vain for
progress in the larger world.” The
people of Burma had been denied so
many of their fundamental freedoms for
so long. Yet it was environmental and
economic abuse that ultimately sparked
widespread outrage because it hit home
in a direct and tangible way. We see a
similar phenomenon with antipollution
protests in China. What starts as a
prosaic complaint can quickly become
much more. Once citizens succeed in
demanding responsiveness from their
government on these everyday concerns,
it can raise expectations for more
fundamental change. It’s part of what I
call making “human rights a human
reality.”
Stopping the dam seemed to unleash a
flood of new activity. On October 12 the
government began freeing a few hundred
of its more than two thousand political
prisoners. On the 14th it legalized labor
union organizing for the first time since
the 1960s. These moves came on the
heels of modest steps earlier in the year
to ease censorship restrictions and
defuse conflicts with armed ethnic
minority groups in the countryside. The
government also initiated discussions
with the International Monetary Fund
about economic reforms. A cautiously
optimistic Suu Kyi spoke to supporters
in Rangoon and called for more
prisoners to be released and additional
reforms.
In Washington we monitored these
events closely and wondered how much
weight to give them. We needed a better
feel for what was actually happening on
the ground. I asked the State
Department’s top human rights official,
Mike Posner, to accompany Derek
Mitchell to Burma and attempt to get a
read on the intentions of the new
government. In early November Mike
and Derek met with members of
Parliament and had encouraging
discussions about further reforms,
including allowing freedom of assembly
and opening up registration for political
parties. Suu Kyi’s party remained
banned and would not be able to
participate in 2012 Parliamentary
elections unless the law was changed.
This was one of the top concerns of the
skeptical opposition leaders who Mike
and Derek met. They also cited the large
number of political prisoners still being
held and reports of serious human rights
abuses in ethnic areas. Suu Kyi and
others were urging us not to move too
hastily to lift sanctions and reward the
regime until we had more concrete
evidence of democratic progress. That
seemed sensible to me, but we also had
to keep engaging the leadership and
nurturing these early advances.
In early November, as Mike and Derek
were meeting with dissidents and
legislators in Burma, President Obama
and I were busy planning how to take the
pivot to the next level. We knew the
President’s upcoming trip to Asia would
be our best opportunity to demonstrate
what the pivot meant. We started with
APEC economic meetings in Hawaii and
then he went on to Australia. I stopped in
the Philippines to commemorate the
sixtieth anniversary of our mutual
defense treaty on the deck of the
destroyer USS Fitzgerald in Manila, and
then met the President in Thailand,
another key ally.
On November 17, President Obama
and I both arrived in Bali, Indonesia, for
a meeting of the East Asia Summit and
the U.S.-ASEAN Leaders Meeting, the
most important annual gathering of heads
of state across Asia. It was the first time
a U.S. President attended the East Asia
Summit. This was a testament to
President Obama’s commitment to our
expanded engagement in the region, and
a direct result of the groundwork we had
laid beginning in 2009 by signing the
ASEAN Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation and making multilateral
diplomacy a priority in Asia. As in
Vietnam the previous year, territorial
disputes in the South China Sea were
once again on everyone’s mind. Just as
at the ASEAN meeting in Hanoi, China
did not want to discuss the issue in an
open, multilateral setting, especially one
that included the United States. “Outside
forces should not, under any pretext, get
involved,” said Chinese Premier Wen
Jiabao. The Vice Foreign Minister was
more direct. “We hope the South China
Sea will not be discussed at the East
Asia Summit,” he told reporters. But
smaller countries, including Vietnam and
the Philippines, were determined to have
the discussion. In Hanoi we had tried to
advance a collaborative approach
toward peaceful resolution of disputes in
the South China Sea, but in the months
since that encounter Beijing had dug in
its heels even deeper.
On the afternoon of November 18, I
accompanied President Obama to the
private leaders meeting, where we met
with seventeen other heads of state and
their Foreign Ministers. No other staff or
journalists were allowed in. President
Obama and Premier Wen both listened
quietly as other leaders began the
discussion. Singapore, the Philippines,
Vietnam, and Malaysia were among the
early speakers, all of them with an
interest in the South China Sea. Speaking
in turn for two hours, nearly every
leader repeated the principles we had
discussed in Hanoi: ensuring open
access and freedom of navigation,
resolving disputes peacefully and
collaboratively within the framework of
international law, avoiding coercion and
threats, and supporting a code of
conduct. Soon it was clear there was a
strong consensus in the room. The
leaders spoke forcefully and without
equivocation, but also without acrimony.
Even the Russians agreed that this was
an appropriate and important issue for
the group to discuss.
Finally, after sixteen other leaders had
spoken, President Obama took the
microphone. By now all the arguments
were well aired, so he welcomed the
consensus and reaffirmed U.S. support
for the approach the rest of the region
had articulated. “While we are not a
claimant in the South China Sea dispute,
and while we do not take sides,” he
said, “we have a powerful stake in
maritime security in general, and in the
resolution of the South China Sea issue
specifically—as a resident Pacific
power, as a maritime nation, as a trading
nation and as a guarantor of security in
the Asia-Pacific region.” When the
President finished, he looked around the
room, including at Premier Wen, who
was visibly displeased. This was even
worse than Hanoi. He had not wanted to
discuss the South China Sea at all; now
he faced a united front. Unlike Foreign
Minister Yang in Hanoi, Premier Wen
did not ask for a recess. He responded
politely but firmly, defending China’s
actions and again insisting that this was
not the appropriate forum for such
matters.
While this diplomatic theater was
playing out, I was equally focused on
unfolding events in Burma. In the weeks
leading up to the trip, Kurt had been
recommending bold new steps to engage
with the regime and encourage further
reforms. I had been discussing Burma
with President Obama and his national
security advisors, who wanted to be sure
we didn’t lower our guard or ease
pressure on the regime prematurely. I
had a strong ally in the White House
helping to push engagement: Ben
Rhodes, the President’s longtime aide
who served as Deputy National Security
Advisor. Ben agreed with me that we
had laid the groundwork and now
needed to move forward. Ultimately,
though, there was one person in
particular from whom the President
wanted to hear to be reassured that the
time was right. I asked Kurt and Jake to
speak with Suu Kyi and set up a call
between her and President Obama.
While flying from Australia to Indonesia
on Air Force One, he got on the phone
with her for the first time. She
underscored the important role America
could play in helping her country move
toward democracy. The two Nobel
Peace Prize winners also swapped
stories about their dogs. After the call
the President was ready to move
forward. The next day I stood next to
him as he stepped to the microphones in
Bali and announced that he had asked me
to travel to Burma to personally
investigate prospects for democratic
reform and closer ties between our
countries. “After years of darkness,
we’ve seen flickers of progress,” he
said. I would be the first Secretary of
State to visit in more than half a century.
On the flight home from Indonesia, my
mind was racing ahead to the upcoming
trip. It would be an opportunity to size
up Thein Sein for myself and to finally
meet Suu Kyi in person. Could we find a
way to fan those flickers of progress the
President talked about and ignite truly
far-reaching democratic reforms?
We stopped to refuel in Japan in a
pouring rain. Two Foreign Service
officers with experience in Burma
stationed at our embassy in Tokyo were
waiting. After hearing the President’s
announcement, they had brought me a
stack of books about the country and a
copy of a film about Suu Kyi called The
Lady. It was just what I needed. The
whole team, including the traveling
press corps, watched the movie as we
flew east across the Pacific back to
Washington, where I immediately began
planning my trip to Burma.

I arrived in Nay Pyi Taw late on the
afternoon of November 30, 2011. The
remote capital’s small airstrip is paved
but does not have sufficient lighting for
landings after sundown.
Just before we left Washington, Asia
experts at the State Department had sent
around a memo advising the traveling
party not to wear white, black, or red
clothing because of local cultural norms.
It is not unusual to get that sort of memo
before a trip; there are places where
certain political parties or ethnic groups
are associated with particular colors. So
I diligently went through my closet trying
to find outfits in the appropriate colors
for Burma. I had just bought a lovely
white jacket that was a perfect weight
for hot climates. Would it really be
culturally insensitive to bring it along? I
packed it just in case the experts were
wrong. Sure enough, when we stepped
off the plane, we were greeted by
Burmese wearing all the colors we had
been warned to avoid. I hoped that
wasn’t a sign of deeper misconceptions
on our part, but at least now I could
safely wear my white jacket.
Our motorcade emerged from the
airport into a landscape of vast open
fields. The empty highway seemed
twenty lanes wide. Occasionally we’d
see a bicycle but no other cars and very
few people. We passed a farmer
wearing a traditional conical straw hat
and riding a wagon filled with hay
pulled by a white ox. It was like looking
through a window into an earlier time.
In the distance we saw the towers of
Nay Pyi Taw’s cavernous government
buildings. The city had been built in
secret in 2005 by the military and was
heavily fortified with walls and moats
intended to defend against a hypothetical
American invasion. Few people actually
lived there. Many of the buildings were
empty or unfinished. The whole place
had the feeling of a Potemkin village.
The next morning I visited President
Thein Sein in his ceremonial office. We
sat on gold thrones under a massive
crystal chandelier in an enormous room.
Despite the setting, Thein Sein was
surprisingly low-key and unassuming,
especially for a head of state and leader
of a military junta. He was small and
slightly stooped, with thinning hair and
glasses. He looked more like an
accountant than a general. When he had
served as Prime Minister in the military
government, he had always appeared in
a heavily starched green Army uniform,
but now he wore a traditional blue
Burmese sarong, sandals, and a white
tunic.
Many people in Burma and beyond
speculated that the former ruler, Than
Shwe, had chosen the mild-mannered
Thein Sein as his successor because he
was seen as both nonthreatening to the
outside world and pliable enough to be a
front man for regime hard-liners. So far
Thein Sein had surprised everyone by
showing unexpected independence and
real backbone in pushing his nascent
reform agenda.
In our discussion I was encouraging,
explaining the steps that could lead to
international recognition and easing
sanctions. “You’re on the right path. As
you know, there will be hard choices
and difficult obstacles to overcome,” I
said, “[but] this is an opportunity for you
to leave an historic legacy for your
country.” I also delivered a personal
letter from President Obama, which
underscored the same points.
Thein Sein responded carefully, with
sparks of good humor and a sense of
ambition and vision peeking through his
deliberate sentences. Reforms would
continue, he said. So would his détente
with Suu Kyi. He was also keenly aware
of the broader strategic landscape. “Our
country is situated between two giants,”
he said, referring to China and India, and
he needed to be careful not to risk
disrupting relations with Beijing. Here
was someone who had clearly thought
long and hard about the future of his
country and the role he could play in
achieving it.
In my travels I met at least three kinds
of world leaders: those who share our
values and worldview and are natural
partners, those who want to do the right
thing but lack the political will or
capacity to follow through, and those
who view their interests and values as
fundamentally at odds with ours and will
oppose us whenever they can. I
wondered into which category Thein
Sein would fall. Even if he was sincere
in his desire for democracy, were his
political skills strong enough to
overcome entrenched opposition among
his military colleagues and actually pull
off such a difficult national
transformation?
My inclination was to embrace Thein
Sein in the hopes that international
recognition would strengthen his hand at
home. But there was reason to be
cautious. Before saying too much, I
needed to meet Suu Kyi and compare
notes. We were engaged in a delicate
diplomatic dance, and it was essential
not to get out of step.
After our meeting we moved into a
great hall for lunch, and I sat between
Thein Sein and his wife. She held my
hand and talked movingly about her
family and her hopes to improve life for
Burma’s children.
Then it was on to Parliament and
meetings with a cross-section of
legislators, most carefully picked by the
military. They wore brightly colored
traditional dress, including hats with
horns and embroidered furs. Some were
enthusiastic about engagement with the
United States and further reforms at
home. Others were clearly skeptical of
all the changes going on around them and
longed for a return to the old ways.
The Speaker of the Lower House of
Parliament, Shwe Mann, another former
general, met with me in another gigantic
room, beneath a painting of a lush
Burmese landscape that seemed to
stretch for miles. He was chatty and
good-natured. “We’ve been studying
your country trying to understand how to
run a Parliament,” he told me. I asked if
he’d read books or consulted with
experts. “Oh no,” he said. “We’ve been
watching The West Wing.” I laughed and
promised that we would provide even
more information.
Back at the hotel that evening, sitting
outside at a large table with the
American press corps, I tried to sum up
what I had learned that day. The steps
the civilian government had taken were
significant, including easing restrictions
on media and civil society, releasing
Suu Kyi from house arrest along with
some two hundred other political
prisoners, and enacting new labor and
election laws. Thein Sein had promised
me he would build on this progress and
push through even more far-reaching
reforms, and I wanted to believe him.
But I knew that flickers of progress
could easily be extinguished. There is an
old Burmese proverb: “When it rains,
collect water.” This was a time to
consolidate reforms and lock them in for
the future, so that they would become
ingrained and irreversible. As I had told
Thein Sein that morning, the United
States was prepared to walk the path of
reform with the Burmese people if they
chose to keep moving in that direction.
The flight to Rangoon took just forty
minutes, but it felt like entering another
world after the surreal government ghost
town of Nay Pyi Taw. Rangoon is a city
of more than 4 million people, with
bustling streets and faded colonial
charm. Decades of isolation and
mismanagement had taken its toll on
crumbling façades and peeling paint, but
one could imagine why this place was
once considered a “jewel of Asia.” The
heart of Rangoon is the soaring
Shwedagon Pagoda, a 2,500-year-old
Buddhist temple with glistening gold
towers and countless golden Buddhas.
As a sign of respect for the local custom,
I took off my shoes and walked barefoot
through the pagoda’s magnificent halls.
Security guards hate removing their
shoes; it makes them feel less prepared
in case of an emergency. But the
American journalists thought it was great
fun and loved getting a look at my
toenail polish, which one described as
“sexy siren red.”
Accompanied by a throng of monks
and onlookers, I lit candles and incense
in front of a large Buddha. Then they
brought me to one of the enormous bells
that reputedly weighed forty tons. The
monks handed me a gilded rod and
invited me to strike the bell three times.
Next, as instructed, I poured eleven cups
of water over a small alabaster-white
Buddha in a traditional sign of respect.
“Can I make eleven wishes?” I asked. It
was a fascinating introduction to
Burmese culture. But this was more than
sightseeing. By visiting the revered
pagoda, I hoped to send a message to the
people of Burma that America was
interested in engaging with them, as well
as with their government.
That evening I finally met Suu Kyi in
person, at the lakeside villa where
American Ambassadors used to live. I
wore my white jacket and black pants;
the cautionary clothing memo now
officially forgotten. To everyone’s
amusement, Suu Kyi arrived in a similar
outfit. We had a drink with Derek
Mitchell and Kurt Campbell and then sat
down for a private dinner, just the two
of us. Her political party had been
allowed to register in November 2011,
and after numerous meetings among its
leaders, they had decided to participate
in the 2012 elections. Suu Kyi told me
that she herself would run for
Parliament. After so many years of
forced solitude, it was a daunting
prospect.
Over dinner I offered my impressions
of Thein Sein and the other government
officials I had met in Nay Pyi Taw. I
also shared some memories of my first
run for office. She asked me many
questions about the preparation and
process of becoming a candidate. This
was all so intensely personal for her.
The legacy of her slain father, the hero
of Burmese independence, weighed on
her and spurred her on. That patrimony
gave her a hold on the nation’s psyche,
but it also created a connection to the
very generals who had long imprisoned
her. She was the daughter of an officer, a
child of the military, and she never lost
her respect for the institution and its
codes. We can do business with them,
she said confidently. I thought of Nelson
Mandela embracing his former prison
guards after his inauguration in South
Africa. That had been both a moment of
supreme idealism and hardheaded
pragmatism. Suu Kyi had the same
qualities. She was determined to change
her country, and after decades of
waiting, she was ready to compromise,
cajole, and make common cause with her
old adversaries.
Before parting for the evening, Suu
Kyi and I exchanged personal gifts. I had
brought a stack of American books that I
thought she would enjoy and a chew toy
for her dog. She presented me with a
silver necklace that she had designed
herself, based on a seed pod from an
ancient Burmese pattern.
Suu Kyi and I met again the next
morning, across the lake in her old
childhood colonial home, with
hardwood floors and sweeping ceilings.
It was easy to forget that it had also been
her prison for many years. She
introduced me to the elders of her party,
octogenarians who had lived through
long years of persecution and could
hardly believe the changes they were
now seeing. We sat around a large round
wooden table and listened to their
stories. Suu Kyi has a way with people.
She may have been a global celebrity
and an icon in her country, but she
showed these elders the respect and
attention they deserved, and they loved
her for it.
Later we walked through her gardens,
resplendent with pink and red blossoms.
The barbed-wire barriers that bounded
the property were a pointed reminder of
her past seclusion. We stood on the
porch, arm in arm, and spoke to the
crowd of journalists who had gathered.
“You have been an inspiration,” I told
Suu Kyi. “You are standing for all the
people of your country who deserve the
same rights and freedoms of people
everywhere.” I promised that the United
States would be a friend to the people of
Burma as they made their historic
journey to a better future. She graciously
thanked me for all the support and
consultation we had given over the past
months and years. “This will be the
beginning of a new future for all of us,
provided we can maintain it,” she said.
It was the same mix of optimism and
caution that we all felt.
I left Suu Kyi’s house and drove to a
nearby art gallery dedicated to work by
artists from Burma’s many ethnic
minority groups, who make up nearly 40
percent of the population. The walls
were covered with photographs of the
many faces of Burma. There was pride
in their eyes, but sadness too. Ever since
the country achieved independence in
1948, the Burmese military had waged
war against armed separatist groups in
the country’s ethnic enclaves. Atrocities
were committed on both sides, and
civilians were caught in the crossfire,
but the Army was the primary
perpetrator. These bloody conflicts were
major obstacles to the new era we hoped
Burma would soon enter, and I had
stressed to Thein Sein and his Ministers
how important it was to bring them to
peaceful conclusions. Representatives
from all the major ethnic groups told me
how much their people had suffered in
the conflicts and hoped for cease-fires.
Some wondered aloud whether Burma’s
new rights and freedoms would extend
to them. It was a question that would
haunt the reform process.
The flickers of progress were real. If
Thein Sein released more political
prisoners, passed new laws protecting
human rights, sought cease-fires in the
ethnic conflicts, cut off military contacts
with North Korea, and ensured free and
fair elections in 2012, we would
reciprocate by restoring full diplomatic
relations and naming an Ambassador,
easing sanctions, and stepping up
investment and development assistance
in the country. As I had told Suu Kyi, it
would be action for action. I hoped my
visit had provided the international
support that reformers needed to bolster
their credibility and push ahead with
their work. On the streets of Rangoon,
posters went up with photographs of my
walk in the garden with Suu Kyi. Her
portrait was quickly becoming almost as
common as her father’s.
Meanwhile, I wished I could have
experienced more of this picturesque
country, traveling up the Irrawaddy,
seeing Mandalay. I promised myself that
I would return one day soon with my
family.
Suu Kyi and I stayed in close touch
over the following months as the reform
process moved forward, speaking five
times on the phone. I was delighted
when, in April 2012, she won a seat in
Parliament, as did more than forty of her
party’s candidates, winning all but one
seat they contested. This time the results
were not annulled, and she was allowed
to serve. Now she could put her political
skills to use.

In September 2012 Suu Kyi traveled to
the United States for a seventeen-day
tour. I remembered the wish we had
shared in our first phone call. I had
visited her, and now she would visit me.
We sat together in a cozy nook outside
the kitchen in my home in Washington,
just the two of us.
The months since my visit to Burma
had been full of exciting changes. Thein
Sein had pulled his government slowly
but surely down the path we had
discussed in Nay Pyi Taw. He and I had
met again over the summer at a
conference in Cambodia, and he
reaffirmed his commitment to reform.
Hundreds of political prisoners were
released, including students who
organized the 1988 pro-democracy
demonstrations and Buddhist monks who
participated in protests in 2007. A
fragile cease-fire was signed with some
of the rebel groups representing ethnic
minorities. Political parties were
beginning to organize again, and soon
privately owned newspapers would be
allowed to publish for the first time in
nearly half a century.
In response, the United States had
begun easing sanctions and had sworn in
Derek Mitchell as our first Ambassador
in years. Burma was rejoining the
international community and was set to
chair ASEAN in 2014, a long-standing
goal. While the Arab Spring was losing
its luster in the Middle East, Burma was
giving the world new hope that it is
indeed possible to transition peacefully
from dictatorship to democracy. Its
progress was bolstering the argument
that a mix of sanctions and engagement
could be an effective tool to drive
change in even the most closed societies.
If the Burmese generals could be coaxed
in from the cold by the lure of
international trade and respect, then
perhaps no regime was irredeemable.
Reassessing the conventional wisdom
on Burma back in 2009 and then
experimenting with direct engagement
against the advice of many friends back
home had been a risky choice, but it was
paying off for the United States. Burma’s
progress, in the wake of President
Obama’s well-received Asian tour in
November 2011, which helped erase any
lingering memories from 2009 in
Beijing, was making the administration’s
pivot look like a success. There were
still plenty of questions about what
would happen next, both in Burma and
across the region, but in February 2012
the journalist James Fallows, who has
long experience in Asia, wrote
glowingly about the pivot and the
President’s trip in the Atlantic: “Much
like Nixon’s approach to China, I think it
will eventually be studied for its skillful
combination of hard and soft power,
incentives and threats, urgency and
patience, plus deliberate—and effective
—misdirection.” Professor Walter
Russell Mead, a frequent critic of the
administration, called our efforts “as
decisive a diplomatic victory as anyone
is likely to see.”
Still, despite the progress we had
seen in Burma, Suu Kyi looked worried
when we met in Washington. When she
arrived at my house, she asked to speak
to me alone. The problems, she said,
were that political prisoners still
languished behind bars, some ethnic
conflicts had actually gotten worse, and
the gold rush by foreign companies was
creating new opportunities for
corruption.
Suu Kyi was now in Parliament,
cutting deals and forming new
relationships with former adversaries,
trying hard to balance all the pressures
on her. Shwe Mann, the Speaker of the
Lower House of Parliament, was gaining
stature, and Suu Kyi had developed a
positive working relationship with him;
she appreciated his willingness to
consult with her on important matters.
The political situation was complicated
by the possibility that Thein Sein, Shwe
Mann, and Suu Kyi were all potential
Presidential candidates in 2015. The
behind-the-scenes maneuvering, shifting
alliances, and political competition
were getting intense. Welcome to
democracy!
Thein Sein had gotten Burma moving,
but could he finish the job? If Suu Kyi
withdrew her cooperation, there was no
telling what would happen. International
confidence might collapse. Thein Sein
would become vulnerable to hard-liners
who still hoped to roll back the reforms
they resented. Suu Kyi and I discussed
the competing pressures she faced. I
sympathized because I too had
experienced the push and pull of
political life. And I knew from years of
painful experiences how hard it can be
to be cordial, let alone collegial, with
those who had once been your political
adversaries. I thought her best option
was to grit her teeth, keep pushing Thein
Sein to follow through on his
commitments, and keep their partnership
alive at least through the next election.
I know it’s not easy, I said. But you
are now in a position where what you’re
doing is never going to be easy. You
have to figure out a way to keep working
together until or unless there is an
alternative path. This is all part of
politics. You’re on a stage now. You’re
not locked away under house arrest. So
you’ve got to project many different
interests and roles all at once, because
you are a human rights advocate, you are
a member of Parliament, and you may be
a future Presidential candidate. Suu Kyi
understood all this, but the pressure on
her was enormous. She was revered as a
living saint, yet now she had to learn to
wheel and deal like any elected official.
It was a precarious balance.
We moved to my dining room and
joined Kurt, Derek, and Cheryl Mills.
As we ate, Suu Kyi described the
district she now represented in
Parliament. As much as she was focused
on the high drama of national politics,
she was also obsessed with the minutiae
of constituency service and solving
problems. I remembered feeling exactly
the same way when the voters of New
York elected me to the U.S. Senate. If
you can’t get the potholes fixed, nothing
else matters.
I had one more word of advice. The
next day she would receive the
Congressional Gold Medal in a lavish
ceremony in the Rotunda of the U.S.
Capitol. It would be a well-deserved
recognition for her years of moral
leadership. “Tomorrow, when you get
that Congressional Gold Medal, I think
you should say something nice about
President Thein Sein,” I told her.
The next afternoon I joined
Congressional leaders and about five
hundred others at the Capitol to honor
Suu Kyi. When it was my turn to speak, I
recalled the experience of meeting Suu
Kyi in the house that had been her jail
for so many years and compared it to
walking through Robben Island with
Nelson Mandela years before. “These
two political prisoners were separated
by great distances, but they were both
marked by uncommon grace, generosity
of spirit and unshakable will,” I said.
“And they both understood something
that I think we all have to grasp: the day
they walked out of prison, the day the
house arrest was ended, was not the end
of the struggle. It was the beginning of a
new phase. Overcoming the past, healing
a wounded country, building a
democracy, would require moving from
icon to politician.” I looked at Suu Kyi
and wondered whether she had thought
about my suggestion from the night
before. She was visibly moved by the
emotion of the moment. Then she started
to speak.
“I stand here now strong in the
knowledge that I’m among friends who
will be with us as we continue with our
task of building a nation that offers
peace and prosperity and basic human
rights protected by the rule of law to all
who dwell within its realms,” she said.
Then she added, “This task has been
made possible by the reform measures
instituted by President Thein Sein.” I
caught her eye and smiled. “From the
depths of my heart, I thank you, the
people of America, and you, their
representatives, for keeping us in your
hearts and minds during the dark years
when freedom and justice seemed
beyond our reach. There will be
difficulties in the way ahead, but I am
confident that we shall be able to
overcome all obstacles with the help and
support of our friends.”
Afterward she asked me, with a
twinkle in her eye, “How was that?”
“Oh, that was great, really great,” I
said.
“Well, I’m going to try, I’m really
going to try.”
The next week I met with Thein Sein
at the United Nations General Assembly
in New York and talked through many of
the concerns Suu Kyi had raised with
me. He seemed more in command than in
our first conversation, in Nay Pyi Taw,
and he listened carefully. Thein Sein
was never going to be a charismatic
politician, but he was proving to be an
effective leader. In his speech at the UN
he praised Suu Kyi as his partner in
reform for the first time in a public
setting and pledged to continue to work
with her toward democracy.

In November 2012 President Obama
decided to see Burma’s “flickers of
progress” for himself. This was his first
foreign trip since winning reelection,
and it would be our last as a traveling
team. After visiting together with the
King of Thailand in his Bangkok hospital
room, we flew to Burma for a six-hour
stop, to be followed by the East Asia
Summit in Cambodia. The President
planned to meet with both Thein Sein
and Suu Kyi and address students at
Yangon University. Crowds jammed the
streets as we drove by. Children waved
American flags. People craned to see
something that was impossible to
imagine not long before.
Rangoon felt like a different city,
although it had been just under a year
since my previous visit. Foreign
investors had discovered Burma and
were rushing to put down stakes in what
they saw as the last Asian frontier. New
buildings were under construction, and
real estate prices were soaring. The
government had begun relaxing
restrictions on the internet, and access
was slowly expanding. Industry experts
expected the smartphone market in
Burma to grow from practically no users
in 2011 to 6 million by 2017. And now
the President of the United States himself
had come to Burma. “We’ve been
waiting fifty years for this visit,” one
man along the route told a reporter.
“There is justice and law in the United
States. I want our country to be like
that.”
For the ride from the airport, Kurt and
I joined the President in the big, armored
Presidential limousine that is transported
everywhere the President travels (known
fondly as “the Beast”), along with his
close aide Valerie Jarrett. As we rolled
through the city, President Obama
looked out the window at the soaring
golden Shwedagon Pagoda and asked
what it was. Kurt told him about its
central place in Burmese culture and that
I had gone there to demonstrate respect
for Burma’s people and history. The
President asked why he wasn’t going
there too. During the trip-planning
process, the Secret Service had vetoed
the idea of visiting the busy temple. They
were concerned about the security risks
posed by the crowds of worshippers
(and they certainly didn’t want to take
their shoes off!), and no one wanted to
close down the site and inconvenience
all the other visitors. Having years of
familiarity with the concerns of the
Secret Service, I suggested that they
might agree to an unscheduled “off the
record” stop, or “OTR,” as they are
called. No one would know he was
coming, and that would allay some of the
security concerns. Plus, when the
President decides he’s going to go
someplace, it’s very difficult to say no.
Soon enough, after the meeting with
President Thein Sein, we were strolling
through the ancient pagoda, surrounded
by surprised Buddhist monks, about as
close to being a couple of regular
tourists as a President and a Secretary of
State ever get.
Following the meeting with Thein
Sein and the unscheduled stop at the
pagoda, we were at Suu Kyi’s house and
she was welcoming the President into
what had once been her jail and was
now a hub of political activity. She and I
embraced like the friends we had
become. She thanked the President for
America’s support for democracy in
Burma but cautioned: “The most difficult
time in any transition is when we think
that success is in sight. Then we have to
be very careful that we are not lured by
a mirage of success.”
The end of Burma’s story is yet to be
written, and there are many challenges
ahead. Ethnic strife has continued,
raising alarms about new human rights
abuses. In particular, spasms of mob
violence against the Rohingya, an ethnic
community of Muslims, rocked the
country in 2013 and early 2014. The
decision to expel Doctors Without
Borders from the area and not to count
Rohingyas in the upcoming census
brought a barrage of criticism. All this
threatened to undermine progress and
weaken international support. The
general elections in 2015 will be a
major test for Burma’s nascent
democracy, and more work is needed to
ensure that they will be free and fair. In
short, Burma could keep moving
forward, or it could slide backward. The
support of the United States and the
international community will be crucial.
It is sometimes hard to resist getting
breathless about Burma. But we have to
remain clear-eyed and levelheaded
about the challenges and difficulties that
lie ahead. Some in Burma lack the will
to complete the democratic journey.
Others possess the will but lack the
tools. There is a long way to go. Still, as
President Obama told the students at
Yangon University that day in November
2012, what the Burmese people have
already achieved is a remarkable
testament to the power of the human
spirit and the universal yearning for
freedom. For me, the memories of those
early days of flickering progress and
uncertain hope remain a high point of my
time as Secretary and an affirmation of
the unique role the United States can and
should play in the world as a champion
of dignity and democracy. It was
America at our best.
PART THREE

War and Peace
7

Af-Pak: Surge

President Obama went around the table
asking each of us for our
recommendation. Should we deploy
more troops to join the eight-year-old
war in Afghanistan? If so, how many?
What should their mission be? And how
long should they stay before coming
home? These were some of the hardest
choices he would have to make as
President. The consequences would be
profound for our men and women in
uniform, our military families, and our
national security, as well as the future of
Afghanistan.
It was three days before Thanksgiving
2009, after 8 P.M. The President was
sitting at the head of the long table in the
White House Situation Room, flanked by
his National Security Council. I sat next
to National Security Advisor Jim Jones
on the President’s left, across the table
from Vice President Biden, Defense
Secretary Bob Gates, and Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mike Mullen. In
front of us the table was covered with
papers and binders. (After months of
watching the Pentagon brass come to our
Situation Room meetings with flashy
PowerPoint presentations and colorful
maps, I asked the State Department to get
more creative with its briefing materials.
Now there were plenty of colored maps
and charts to go around.)
This was my third meeting of the day
at the White House with President
Obama and the ninth time since
September that the senior national
security team had assembled to debate
the way forward in Afghanistan. We
looked at the challenge from every
conceivable angle. Finally we zeroed in
on a plan to surge thirty thousand U.S.
troops to Afghanistan by the middle of
2010, supplemented by an additional ten
thousand from our allies. They would
implement a new approach, focused on
providing security in Afghanistan’s
cities, bolstering the government, and
delivering services to the people, rather
than waging a battle of attrition with the
Taliban insurgents. There would be a
full progress review at the end of the
year, and we would begin to draw down
troops by July 2011. How many and how
fast would be up for discussion but
would likely be dictated by conditions
on the ground.
The team was divided about the
merits of this plan. Secretary Gates and
the military strongly supported it; Vice
President Biden opposed it just as
strongly. By now the main arguments
were well reviewed, but the President
wanted to hear where we each stood,
one more time.

Afghanistan, a mountainous, landlocked
country located between Pakistan to the
east and Iran to the west, is home to
about 30 million of the poorest, least
educated, and most battle-scarred
people on earth. It has been called the
“Graveyard of Empires” because so
many invading armies and would-be
occupiers have foundered in its
unforgiving terrain. In the 1980s the
United States, Saudi Arabia, and
Pakistan supported an insurgency there
against a Soviet puppet government. In
1989 the Soviets withdrew, and with
that victory American interest in the
country waned.
After a period of civil war in the
1990s, the Taliban, an extremist group
with medieval cultural views, seized
control of Afghanistan under the
leadership of a one-eyed radical cleric
named Mullah Omar. They imposed
severe restrictions on women in the
name of Islam: women were forced to
stay out of public view, required to wear
full burqas, covering them completely
from head to toe with only a meshcovered opening for their eyes, and
avoid leaving their homes unless
accompanied by a male family member;
girls and women were banned from
schools and denied social and economic
rights. The Taliban inflicted severe
punishments on women who violated
their rules, ranging from torture to public
execution. The stories that filtered out of
the country were horrifying. I remember
hearing about an elderly woman who
was flogged with a metal cable until her
leg was broken because a bit of her
ankle was showing under her burqa. It
seemed hard to believe that human
beings could be capable of such cruelty,
and in the name of God.
Sickened by what was happening, as
First Lady I began speaking out in an
effort to rally international
condemnation. “There probably is no
more egregious and systematic trampling
of fundamental rights of women today
than what is happening in Afghanistan
under the iron rule of the Taliban,” I
declared at the UN’s International
Women’s Day celebration in 1999.
The Taliban also gave safe haven to
Osama bin Laden and other al Qaeda
terrorists. Many of these fanatics, who
had come from elsewhere, put down
deep roots in the region after fighting the
Soviets. In response to the bombings of
our embassies in East Africa in 1998,
the Clinton Administration used cruise
missiles to strike an al Qaeda training
camp in Afghanistan where intelligence
reports said bin Laden would be. He
managed to escape. Then came the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
After the Taliban refused to turn over
bin Laden, President Bush ordered the
invasion of Afghanistan and backed a
rebel group called the Northern Alliance
to oust the Taliban from power.
The swift victory in overthrowing the
Taliban regime in Afghanistan soon gave
way to a long-running insurgency, as the
Taliban regrouped in safe havens across
the border in Pakistan. As a Senator I
visited Afghanistan three times, first in
2003, when I had Thanksgiving dinner
with our troops in Kandahar, and then
again in 2005 and 2007. I’ll never forget
the words of one American soldier I
met: “Welcome to the forgotten front
lines in the war against terrorism.” The
Taliban took advantage of the Bush
Administration’s preoccupation with
Iraq and began reclaiming territory
across Afghanistan that it had initially
been forced to cede. The Westernbacked government in Kabul appeared
corrupt and feckless. Afghans were
hungry, frustrated, and frightened. There
weren’t enough U.S. troops to secure the
country, nor did the Bush Administration
appear to have a strategy for reversing
the downward slide.
During the 2008 campaign both thenSenator Obama and I called for a
renewed focus on Afghanistan. It would
take more troops, I argued, but also a
comprehensive new strategy that
addressed Pakistan’s role in the conflict.
“The border areas between Pakistan and
Afghanistan are among the most
important and dangerous in the world,” I
said in a speech in February 2008.
“Ignoring these realities of what is
happening on the ground in both
Afghanistan and Pakistan has been one
of the most dangerous failures of the
Bush foreign policy.” Attacks on
American troops and those of our allies
continued to climb, and 2008 became the
deadliest year yet in Afghanistan, with
nearly three hundred Coalition forces
killed in action.
When President Obama came into
office in January 2009, he found a
request waiting from the Pentagon asking
for thousands of additional troops to
block the Taliban’s expected summer
offensive and provide security for the
upcoming Presidential elections. We
discussed the proposal in one of our first
National Security Council meetings after
the inauguration. Despite our campaign
pledges to put more resources into the
war in Afghanistan, it was reasonable to
ask whether it made sense to deploy
more troops before we had time to
decide on a new strategy. But the
military logistics necessary to deploy
those forces by the summer necessitated
a quick decision.
The President approved the
deployment of seventeen thousand troops
on February 17. He commissioned a
strategy review led by Bruce Riedel, an
experienced CIA analyst with extensive
knowledge of the conflict, along with
Michèle Flournoy, the third-ranking
official at the Defense Department, and
Richard Holbrooke, our Special
Representative for Afghanistan and
Pakistan. In the report they delivered in
March, they recommended that instead of
viewing them as two distinct issues,
Afghanistan and Pakistan should be
approached as a single regional
challenge, shorthanded to Af-Pak, and
that we should place greater focus on
training Afghan troops to perform tasks
being handled by us and our allies. In
response President Obama deployed
four thousand additional U.S. military
trainers to work with the Afghan
National Security Forces. The Riedel
review emphasized the need to use “all
elements of national power” in a fully
resourced counterinsurgency campaign.
“Not just on the military side,” Riedel
explained, “on the civilian side, as
well.” That included more intensive
regional diplomacy and expanded
economic development, agricultural
support, and infrastructure construction.
Much of that work would fall to the State
Department and USAID.
The President announced his military
and civilian strategy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan on March 27. He set a narrow
goal for the war: “To disrupt, dismantle,
and defeat al Qaeda in Pakistan and
Afghanistan, and to prevent their return
to either country in the future.” By
refocusing so specifically on al Qaeda,
as opposed to the Taliban insurgents
who were the ones doing the vast
majority of the fighting, the President
was linking the war back to its source:
the 9/11 attacks. He also raised the
possibility of a peace and reconciliation
process that would bring willing
insurgents in from the cold while
isolating the hardcore extremists.
Although there were now about sixtyeight thousand U.S. troops in
Afghanistan, the summer fighting went
badly. The Taliban insurgency continued
to gain strength, and the security
situation deteriorated. Reports indicated
an increase in Taliban fighters over the
previous three years from seven
thousand to twenty-five thousand. And
attacks on NATO forces rose, with more
than 260 fatalities from June to
September, compared to fewer than a
hundred deaths over the four prior
months. In May the President removed
the commanding general in Afghanistan
and replaced him with Lieutenant
General Stanley McChrystal. Secretary
Gates explained that the switch was
needed to bring “fresh thinking” and
“fresh eyes.” Then, in August, the
Afghan Presidential election was marred
by widespread fraud. In September
General McChrystal asked the President
to consider deploying more troops. He
warned that without more resources, the
war effort would likely result in failure.
That was not what the White House
wanted to hear. So before he would even
entertain the Pentagon’s request, the
President wanted to be sure we thought
through every option and contingency.
He launched a second comprehensive
strategic review, this time leading it
himself. Starting on a Sunday in midSeptember and continuing throughout the
fall, President Obama regularly
convened his top national security
advisors in the White House Situation
Room to debate the tough questions
presented by a war that was on its way
to becoming the longest in American
history.
General McChrystal, with the support
of General David Petraeus, the
commander of all U.S. forces in the
region, eventually presented three
options: deploy a small additional force
of around ten thousand troops to bolster
training of the Afghan Army; send forty
thousand troops to fight the Taliban in
the most contested areas; or dispatch
more than eighty thousand to secure the
entire country. The generals were savvy
bureaucratic warriors, and, like
characters in the Goldilocks story, they
often would present three options in
answer to any question, expecting that
the middle one would end up being
favored.

General Petraeus proved to be an
effective advocate. He was clearthinking, competitive, and politically
savvy, and his arguments were informed
by hard-learned lessons from Iraq. The
troubled legacy of that war loomed large
over our debate about Afghanistan.
Petraeus had taken command of the
failing U.S. effort in Iraq in early 2007,
in the middle of another deadly
insurgency. He presided over the surge
of more than twenty thousand additional
American troops that deployed to some
of the most dangerous parts of the
country. In January 2007 President Bush
announced the Iraq surge in a prime-time
speech to a skeptical nation.
His decision to send more troops was
something of a surprise, because a
respected bipartisan panel, the Iraq
Study Group, had issued their report
recommending handing over more
responsibility to Iraqi security forces,
drawing down U.S. troops, and
launching more intensive diplomatic
efforts in the region. President Bush
essentially chose to do the opposite. In
his speech he mentioned regional
diplomacy and doing more to encourage
reconciliation among Iraq’s fractured
sects and political factions, but most of
the emphasis was on the security more
U.S. troops could provide.
I doubted that was the right decision
at that time. After years of blown calls
and missed opportunities, there were
questions about the ability of the Bush
Administration to manage a major
escalation. The next night I left for a trip
to Iraq with Senator Evan Bayh of
Indiana and Congressman John McHugh
of New York, a Republican who went
on to serve as Secretary of the Army
under President Obama. It was my third
visit to Iraq as Senator; I had last been
there in 2005 with Senators John
McCain, Susan Collins, Russ Feingold,
and Lindsey Graham. I wanted to see
with my own eyes how things had
changed and to talk to our troops and
commanders to get their perspectives on
the challenges we faced.
I also had other reasons to be
skeptical. My lack of confidence in the
Bush Administration went back to the
fall of 2002, when it was boasting of
ironclad intelligence about Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.
After weighing the evidence and seeking
as many opinions as I could inside and
outside our government, Democrats and
Republicans alike, I voted to authorize
military action in Iraq if the diplomatic
efforts, meaning the UN weapons
inspections, failed.
I came to deeply regret giving
President Bush the benefit of the doubt
on that vote. He later asserted that the
resolution gave him the sole authority to
decide when the clock had run out on
weapons inspections. On March 20,
2003, he decided that it had, and he
launched the war, with the UN weapons
inspectors pleading for just a few more
weeks to finish the job. Over the years
that followed, many Senators came to
wish they had voted against the
resolution. I was one of them. As the
war dragged on, with every letter I sent
to a family in New York who had lost a
son or daughter, a father or mother, my
mistake become more painful.
Five years later President Bush asked
us to trust him again, this time about his
proposed surge, and I wasn’t buying it. I
didn’t believe that simply sending more
troops would solve the mess we were
in. Our military is the best in the world,
and our troops give their all to succeed
in whatever they’re asked to do. But
putting the burden on them alone, without
an equally robust diplomatic strategy,
wasn’t fair and wasn’t wise. We needed
both if we were going to get at the heart
of the underlying challenges: the
sectarian conflicts that were tearing the
country apart, as well as the regional
rivalries playing out inside Iraq. Most in
the Bush Administration seemed to have
little interest in that sort of work,
including confronting or engaging Syria
or Iran, even though they were a big part
of the underlying challenges we faced in
Iraq. In 2003 the United States went to
war in Iraq with only half a strategy,
with Colin Powell’s State Department
all but shut out of postwar planning. We
weren’t going to get out with only half.
Later, when I got to the State Department
myself as Secretary and saw the
expertise of the career professionals
there, I was even more appalled that they
had been largely excluded by the Bush
Administration.
When Petraeus appeared before the
Senate Armed Services Committee for
his confirmation hearing in late January
2007, I pressed him on these points. I
pointed out that the counterinsurgency
manual he had written himself at the
Army’s Command and General Staff
College in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
said that military progress was linked to
internal political progress and that one
could not be achieved without the other.
We had learned the same lesson trying to
bring peace to the Balkans. “You are
being sent to administer a policy that
frankly does not reflect your experience
or advice,” I said. “You wrote the book,
General, but the policy is not by the
book. And you are being asked to square
the circle, to find a military solution to a
political crisis.”
Fortunately, when he got to Iraq,
Petraeus followed a strategy that looked
a lot more like what he had advocated
for in his writings and what I had
pressed him on during the hearing
instead of the Bush Administration’s
approach to date. Petraeus’s
comprehensive counterinsurgency
strategy became known as COIN. It
focused on protecting civilian
population centers and winning Iraqis’
“hearts and minds” through
relationship-building and development
projects. The slogan for the strategy
became “Clear, hold, and build.” The
goal was to rid an area of insurgents,
defend it so they couldn’t return, and
invest in infrastructure and governance
so residents saw an improvement in their
lives and would begin defending
themselves. Under Petraeus, American
troops in Iraq left their large, heavily
fortified bases and fanned out into
neighborhoods and villages, which put
them more directly in harm’s way but
also enabled them to provide security.
Equally important, if not more
consequential, there was a gamechanging development on the ground that
few saw coming. A number of Sunni
sheiks who had formerly supported the
insurgency became fed up with al
Qaeda’s brutality toward their people
and split from the extremists. In what
became known as the “Sunni
Awakening,” more than 100,000 tribal
fighters switched sides and ended up on
the American payroll. These events
profoundly shifted the trajectory of the
war.
Back at home, domestic politics was
certainly part of the backdrop of the
debate over the surge. By then it was
clear just how wrong we had gotten Iraq.
While the war in Iraq divided America
from the start, by 2006 the American
people were overwhelmingly against the
war—as they made clear that November
in the midterm elections. As we learned
in Vietnam, it’s very difficult to sustain a
long and costly war without support
from the American people and a spirit of
shared sacrifice. I did not think we
should escalate America’s commitment
in Iraq with such overwhelming
opposition at home.
During my time in the Senate there
were several Republicans whose
opinion I valued highly. One of them
was John Warner of Virginia. Senator
Warner previously served as Secretary
of the Navy under President Nixon and
was the Ranking Member on the Senate
Armed Services Committee, on which I
sat. He voted for the Iraq Resolution in
2002, so when he returned from a visit
to Iraq in late 2006 and proclaimed that
in his judgment the war was now going
“sideways,” it sent tremors through his
own party and beyond. While
understated, that single word coming
from John Warner was both an
indictment and a demand for change.
Wherever I traveled I heard from
people who were dead set against the
war and, as a result, personally
disappointed in me. Many had been
opposed from the start; others turned
against it over time. Hardest of all were
the anguished military families who
wanted their loved ones to come home,
veterans worried about their buddies
still serving tours in Iraq, and Americans
of all walks of life who were
heartbroken by the losses of our young
men and women. They were also
frustrated by a war that had weakened
our country’s standing in the world, was
not being paid for, and set back our
strategic interests in the region.
While many were never going to look
past my 2002 vote no matter what I did
or said, I should have stated my regret
sooner and in the plainest, most direct
language possible. I’d gone most of the
way there by saying I regretted the way
President Bush used his authority and by
saying that if we knew then what we
later learned, there wouldn’t have been a
vote. But I held out against using the
word mistake. It wasn’t because of
political expediency. After all, primary
voters and the press were clamoring for
me to say that word. When I voted to
authorize force in 2002, I said that it was
“probably the hardest decision I have
ever had to make.” I thought I had acted
in good faith and made the best decision
I could with the information I had. And I
wasn’t alone in getting it wrong. But I
still got it wrong. Plain and simple.
In our political culture, saying you
made a mistake is often taken as
weakness when in fact it can be a sign of
strength and growth for people and
nations. That’s another lesson I’ve
learned personally and experienced as
Secretary of State.
Serving as Secretary also gave me a
share of the responsibility for sending
Americans into harm’s way to protect
our national security. As First Lady I
watched Bill grapple with the gravity of
these decisions, and as a Senator on the
Armed Services Committee I worked
closely with my colleagues and military
leaders to conduct rigorous oversight.
But there’s nothing like sitting at the
table in the White House Situation Room
where you’re debating questions of war
and peace and facing the unintended
consequences of every decision. And
there’s nothing to prepare you when
people sent to serve in a dangerous
place will not be coming home.
As much as I might have wanted to, I
could never change my vote on Iraq. But
I could try to help us learn the right
lessons from that war and apply them to
Afghanistan and other challenges where
we had fundamental security interests. I
was determined to do exactly that when
facing future hard choices, with more
experience, wisdom, skepticism, and
humility.

Generals Petraeus and McChrystal were
proposing to bring COIN to Afghanistan.
To do it, they needed more troops, just
as they had in Iraq. But what if there
were no equivalent to the Sunni
Awakening this time? Was it possible
we were learning the wrong lessons
from Iraq?
The most vocal opponent of the
Pentagon’s proposals was Vice
President Biden. For him, the idea of a
surge was a nonstarter. Afghanistan was
not Iraq. A large-scale effort at “nationbuilding” in a place with little
infrastructure or governance was
doomed to fail. He didn’t think that the
Taliban could be defeated, and he
believed that sending more U.S. troops
was a recipe for another bloody
quagmire. Instead the Vice President
argued for a smaller military footprint
and a focus on counterterrorism. General
Jones and Rahm Emanuel raised similar
concerns.
The problem with this argument was
that if the Taliban continued to seize
more of the country, it would be that
much harder to conduct effective
counterterrorism operations. We
wouldn’t have the same intelligence
networks necessary to locate the
terrorists or the bases from which to
launch strikes inside or outside
Afghanistan. Al Qaeda already had safe
havens in Pakistan. If we abandoned
large parts of Afghanistan to the Taliban,
they would again have safe havens there
as well.
Another skeptic on sending more
troops was Richard Holbrooke. We had
known each other since the 1990s, when
he served as my husband’s chief
negotiator in the Balkans. In 1996
Holbrooke proposed that I go to Bosnia
to visit with religious leaders, civil
society groups, and women who had
borne the brunt of the violence. This was
an unusual assignment for a First Lady,
but, as I came to learn, Richard
Holbrooke rarely wasted his time with
the usual.
Holbrooke was a large and imposing
figure, bursting with talent and ambition.
After joining the Foreign Service in
1962 at age twenty-one, full of Kennedyera idealism, he came of age in Vietnam.
That was where he learned firsthand
about the difficulties of
counterinsurgency. Richard rose fast
through the ranks. In the Carter
Administration, when he was still in his
mid-thirties, he became Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, helping to normalize
relations with China. He secured his
place in history by going toe-to-toe with
the Serbian dictator Slobodan Milošević
in 1995 and negotiating the Dayton
Peace Accords to end the war in Bosnia.
My relationship with Richard
deepened over the years. When he was
Ambassador to the UN in the last couple
years of the Clinton Administration, we
worked together on AIDS and global
health issues. I also became close with
his wife, Kati Marton, a journalist and
author. Richard and Kati threw
wonderful dinner parties. You never
knew who you were going to meet—a
Nobel laureate, a movie star, maybe
even a Queen. One evening he planned
an unusual surprise for me. He had once
heard me make a favorable comment
about the Salvation Army so, in the
middle of dinner, he gave a signal, the
doors swung open, and in marched
members of the Salvation Army Band,
singing and blowing trumpets. Richard
beamed from ear to ear.
When I became Secretary of State, I
knew he was eager to return to service,
so I asked him to take on the
Afghanistan-Pakistan portfolio, which
seemed in need of his outsized talents
and personality. Richard had visited
Afghanistan for the first time in 1971. It
was the beginning of a lifelong
fascination. After trips to the region in
2006 and 2008 as a private citizen, he
wrote several articles urging the Bush
Administration to develop a new
strategy for the war, with an increased
emphasis on Pakistan. I agreed with his
analysis and tasked him with assembling
a dedicated team made up of the best
minds he could find from in and outside
of government to try to put his ideas into
practice. He quickly enlisted academics,
experts from nongovernmental
organizations, up-and-coming talent from
nine federal agencies and departments,
even representatives from allied
governments. It was an eclectic band of
quirky, bright, and very dedicated
people—most of them quite young—
with whom I became close, especially
after Richard died.
Richard’s bulldozer style took some
getting used to. When he had an idea, he
would pitch it relentlessly, phoning
again and again, waiting outside my
office, walking into meetings uninvited,
even once following me into a ladies’
restroom just so he could finish making
his point—in Pakistan no less. If I
rejected his suggestion, he would wait a
few days, pretend it never happened, and
then try again. Finally I would exclaim,
“Richard, I’ve said no. Why do you keep
asking me?” He would look at me
innocently and reply, “I just assumed at
some point you would recognize that you
were wrong and I was right.” To be fair,
sometimes that did happen. It was
exactly this tenacity that made him the
best choice for this urgent mission.
Early in 2009 I invited Richard and
Dave Petraeus for an evening at my
home in Washington so they could get to
know each other. They were men with
endless energy and ideas, and I thought
they would click. They dove right into
the thorniest policy problems, feeding
off each other. At the end of the evening
they both said, “Let’s do this again
tomorrow night.”
Richard shared Dave’s interest in an
aggressive counterinsurgency strategy
that focused on bolstering the credibility
of the government in Kabul and
weakening the appeal of the Taliban as
an alternative. But he wasn’t sure that
tens of thousands of additional troops
were necessary to do it. He worried that
more troops and more fighting would
alienate Afghan civilians and undermine
any goodwill achieved by expanded
economic development and improved
governance.
Drawing on his experiences in the
Balkans, Richard believed that
diplomacy and politics were the keys to
ending the war. He wanted to lead a
diplomatic offensive to change the
regional dynamics that continued to fuel
the conflict, especially the toxic
relations between Pakistan and
Afghanistan and Pakistan and India. He
also pushed us to consider reconciliation
among the warring Afghan combatants as
a top priority.
Richard started visiting regional
capitals, looking for any diplomatic
opening, no matter how small, that might
lead to a political solution, while also
urging Afghanistan’s neighbors to
increase trade and contacts across their
borders. He encouraged many of our
allies and partners to appoint Special
Representatives of their own, so he
would have direct counterparts with
whom to negotiate.
In February 2009, just a few weeks
into our tenure, he organized an
international “contact group” on
Afghanistan that brought together about
fifty countries, along with
representatives from the UN, NATO, the
European Union, and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. He wanted every
nation and group that contributed troops,
donated funds, or wielded influence
inside Afghanistan to share the
responsibility by meeting frequently to
coordinate. A month later Holbrooke
and his team helped the United Nations
plan a major international conference on
Afghanistan at The Hague in the
Netherlands. I even consented to inviting
Iran in order to test the possibility of
cooperating on shared interests in
Afghanistan, such as improving border
security and curbing drug trafficking. At
lunch Holbrooke encountered the senior
Iranian diplomat there in a brief
exchange, one of the highest-level direct
contacts between our countries since
immediately after 9/11.
Within Afghanistan itself, Holbrooke
advocated for a “civilian surge” that
would put into practice the Riedel
review’s recommendations for a
dramatic increase in assistance to
improve life for Afghans and strengthen
the government in Kabul. He pushed to
shift U.S. antinarcotics operations in
Afghanistan away from the farmers who
eked out a living growing opium and
toward the drug traffickers who were
getting rich and using their wealth to
help fund the insurgency. He tried to
reorganize USAID’s development
programs in both Afghanistan and
Pakistan around signature projects that
would make positive impressions on the
people, including hydroelectric dams in
energy-starved Pakistan. And he became
passionate about the propaganda war,
which the Taliban was winning despite
our vastly superior resources and
technology. Insurgents used mobile radio
transmitters mounted on donkeys,
motorcycles, and pickup trucks to spread
fear, intimidate local populations, and
avoid detection by Coalition forces. For
Richard, it was an infuriating problem.
This whirlwind of activity came with
some collateral damage. At the White
House some saw his efforts to
coordinate among various government
agencies as encroaching on their turf.
Younger White House aides rolled their
eyes when he invoked lessons learned in
Vietnam. Officials working on the
military campaign didn’t understand or
appreciate his focus on agriculture
projects or cell phone towers.
Holbrooke’s old-school style of
diplomacy—that mix of improvisation,
flattery, and bluster that had
outmaneuvered Milošević—was a bad
fit in a White House intent on running an
orderly policy process with as little
drama as possible. It was painful to
watch such an accomplished diplomat
marginalized and undercut. I defended
him whenever I could, including from
several attempts to force him out of the
job.
At one point White House aides told
me point-blank to get rid of Richard. “If
the President wants to fire Richard
Holbrooke, he needs to tell me himself,”
I replied. Then, as was often the case on
difficult matters, I spoke directly with
President Obama. I explained why I
thought Richard was an asset. The
President accepted my recommendation
and Richard continued his important
work.
I was convinced that Richard was
right about the need for both a major
diplomatic campaign and a civilian
surge, but I pushed back when he argued
that additional troops weren’t needed to
make it work. “How will we force the
Taliban to the peace table if they have
all the momentum?” I asked him. “How
do you have a civilian surge in Kandahar
when the Taliban are controlling it?”
Over the course of our regular
Situation Room meetings, the President
seemed to be coming around to the idea
of deploying the tens of thousands of
additional troops the military sought,
along with the new diplomats and
development experts Richard and I were
recommending. But he still had a lot of
questions. Chief among them was how
we would avoid an open-ended
commitment to an endless war. What
was the endgame here?
We hoped that the Afghan government
and Army would eventually be strong
enough to take responsibility for
providing security for their own country
and keeping the insurgency at bay, at
which point U.S. help would no longer
be needed and our troops could begin
coming home. That’s why we and our
allies were training Afghan soldiers,
modernizing Afghan government
ministries, and going after the insurgents
—all with the goal of paving the way for
transition to Afghan control. But for this
scenario to work, we needed a credible
partner in Kabul who was prepared to
take up these responsibilities. And in the
fall of 2009 nobody around the table
was confident that we had one.

Talking to Hamid Karzai, the President
of Afghanistan, was often a frustrating
exercise. He is charming, erudite, and
passionate about his beliefs. He is also
proud, stubborn, and quick to bristle at
any perceived slight. There was,
however, no way to avoid him or to take
only those parts of him with which we
agreed. Like it or not, Karzai was a
linchpin of our mission in Afghanistan.
Karzai was the scion of a prominent
Pashtun family with a long history in
Afghan politics. In 2001, he was
installed by the United Nations as a
transitional leader after the fall of the
Taliban and later chosen as interim
President by a traditional grand council
of tribal elders, a loya jirga. He then
won a five-year term in the country’s
first Presidential elections in 2004.
Responsible for a country riven by
ethnic rivalries, devastated by decades
of war, and destabilized by an ongoing
insurgency, Karzai struggled to provide
security and basic services beyond the
capital of Kabul. He regularly frustrated
his American partners with intemperate
outbursts in person and in the press. Yet
he was also a real political survivor
who successfully played rival Afghan
factions off one another and managed to
form a strong personal bond with
President George W. Bush. Despite his
mercurial reputation, Karzai was
actually quite consistent when it came to
his core priorities of maintaining Afghan
sovereignty and unity—and his own
power.
Since 9/11, I had gotten to know
Karzai fairly well. In June 2004, I
brought him to Fort Drum in upstate New
York so he could thank soldiers from the
10th Mountain Division, one of the most
deployed divisions in the U.S. Army, for
their service in Afghanistan. Over the
years I had the privilege of spending
time with the men and women of the 10th
Mountain Division, both at Fort Drum
and in Iraq and Afghanistan. Whenever I
visited one of those war zones as a
Senator, I tried to find time to talk with
soldiers from New York about what was
actually happening on the ground. I heard
harrowing reports about inadequate
body armor and vulnerable Humvees,
but also stories of bravery and
perseverance. When Karzai joined me at
Fort Drum, he was gracious and
respectful of the sacrifices the troops
were making for his country. At other
times over the years, however, he
seemed to blame Americans more than
the Taliban for the violence in his
country. That was hard to stomach.
Still, we needed Karzai, so I worked
hard to connect with him. We related
well on a personal and political level.
And as with many other world leaders,
respect and personal courtesy went a
long way with Karzai. Whenever he
came to Washington, I tried to find ways
to make him feel like the honored guest
he was. It was in those settings that he
was most productive as a partner. One
day we went for a walk in the rose
garden at the Dumbarton Oaks estate in
Georgetown, then sat down for tea in
their conservatory. He talked more
frankly than usual about the challenges
back home, particularly the continuing
threats coming from safe havens in
Pakistan. In return for my gestures in
Washington, he went out of his way to be
hospitable during my visits to Kabul,
including introducing me to his wife in
their family’s private quarters.
In August 2009, Karzai ran for
reelection in a vote that international
monitors found to be plagued with fraud.
The UN called for a runoff between
Karzai and his closest competitor,
Abdullah Abdullah, but Karzai refused
to allow it. He was angry at what he saw
as foreign interference in the election (he
was sure Holbrooke was scheming to
oust him) and desperate not to lose his
power. His pride was hurt that he hadn’t
been declared the victor after the first
vote. By October the impasse was
threatening to derail international
support for his government and squander
what little credibility it had with the
Afghan people.
“Think about the historical
consequences both for yourself, as the
first democratically elected leader, and
for your country,” I implored over the
phone, trying to broker a compromise
that would preserve stability for the
country and legitimacy for the regime in
Kabul. “You have an opportunity to
emerge with a stronger government
under your leadership, but that rests on
the choices that you make going
forward.”
Karzai dug in his heels. He was
defensive about the allegations of
widespread fraud in the election. “How
can we tell the population that their vote
was fraudulent?” he asked. After all,
they had braved Taliban intimidation to
participate in the election. “People’s
fingers and noses were cut off, people
were shot, young women made
sacrifices, your troops made sacrifices
—to call all of that wrong and
invalidated is a frightening scenario.”
Karzai was right about the extraordinary
sacrifices Afghans had made, but wrong
about how to honor them.
Over the next few days we debated
back and forth. I explained to Karzai that
if he accepted the runoff vote, which he
would most likely win, he would gain
the moral high ground and bolster his
credibility with both the international
community and his own citizens. I was
glad that Senator John Kerry, the
chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, was planning on visiting
Kabul. He would be a valuable ally on
the ground, helping me convince Karzai
to move forward with a second round of
voting. With Kerry in the room and with
me on the phone from my office at the
State Department, we tag-teamed him
using our own experiences to make the
case. “I’ve run for office and so has my
husband,” I reminded Karzai. “I know
what it’s like to win and lose. Just like
Senator Kerry does. We know how
difficult these decisions can be.”
I felt we were making progress, so
when it was time for Kerry to return to
Washington for Senate business, I asked
him to stay in Kabul a little longer. He
asked that I call Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid to request that no votes be
held until he returned. When I reached
Reid, he agreed to a one-day grace
period but said he needed Kerry back
quickly.
Finally, after four days of pressure,
Karzai relented. He would accept the
findings of the UN monitors and allow a
second vote to be held in early
November. In the end Abdullah wound
up dropping out and Karzai was
declared the winner. It wasn’t pretty, but
at least we avoided a fatal blow to
Karzai’s overall legitimacy, the likely
collapse of his government, and grave
doubts about democracy from many
Afghans.
In mid-November I attended Karzai’s
inauguration in Kabul. The city was
under exceptionally tight security as
leaders from around the world gathered.
Over a long dinner at the Presidential
Palace on the eve of the ceremony, I
pressed Karzai on several points. First, I
stressed that it was time to start talking
seriously about how to transition
responsibility for security from the U.S.led international Coalition to the Afghan
National Army. Nobody expected this
would happen overnight, but President
Obama wanted assurances that the
United States was not making an openended commitment.
I also talked with Karzai about the
potential for a political settlement that
might one day bring the fighting to an
end. Could negotiations or incentives
ever convince enough members of the
Taliban to put down their guns and
accept the new Afghanistan? Or were
we dealing with a group of implacable
extremists and dead-enders who would
never compromise or reconcile? The
obstacles to this kind of peace process
appeared nearly insurmountable. But, I
reminded Karzai, nobody was going to
walk through the door if it wasn’t open.
Karzai was always willing to pursue
negotiations with the Taliban on his own
terms. One of our problems with him
was that he didn’t see the Taliban as his
primary opponent in the war. He
believed Pakistan was. He was even
reluctant to visit his own forces, who
were fighting the Taliban, in the field.
He thought both Afghanistan and
Coalition forces should direct the lion’s
share of their efforts against Pakistan,
while he negotiated with his fellow
Pashtuns in the Taliban. Unfortunately
for him the Taliban did not want to
reciprocate. U.S. troops and diplomats
would have to lay the groundwork and
then bring the parties together. In the
meantime Karzai flirted with anyone
who claimed to represent the Taliban.
Finally I made it clear that, after the
election controversy, it was essential
that he demonstrate more willingness to
crack down on corruption. It was
endemic in Afghanistan, sapping
resources, fueling a culture of
lawlessness, and alienating the Afghan
people. Karzai needed a plan to go after
the low-level “everyday corruption” of
bribery that is a part of Afghan life and
the pernicious corruption of senior
officials who regularly diverted massive
resources from international aid and
development projects to line their own
pockets. The worst example was the
looting of the Kabul Bank. We didn’t
need Afghanistan to become a “shining
city on a hill,” but reducing large-scale
theft and extortion was vital to the war
effort.
The next day Karzai strode proudly
down a red carpet flanked by an honor
guard in dress uniform. If you saw only
those soldiers, with their crisp white
gloves and shiny boots, you would not
have known that the fledgling Afghan
National Army was still far from ready
to lead the fight against the Taliban on
its own. On that day, at least, they
appeared confident and in command.
So did Karzai. As usual, he cut a
dramatic figure, with his distinctive cape
and jaunty hat. I was one of the few
women present, and Karzai led me
around to meet the Pashtun leaders from,
as he said, both sides of the
nonrecognized border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Pashtuns are
among the most strikingly attractive
people in the world. Their sharpfeatured faces and piercing, often blue
eyes are set off by elaborate turbans.
These are the people from whom Karzai
came, and he never forgot that.
Karzai delivered his inaugural
address inside the palace, flanked by
Afghan flags and surrounded by a huge
bed of red and white flowers. He said
nearly all the right things. There was a
robust pledge to take on corruption. He
announced a new measure we had
discussed to require government
officials to register their assets so that
money and influence could be more
easily tracked. He also outlined steps to
improve delivery of basic services,
strengthen the justice system, and expand
educational and economic opportunities.
To the insurgents, he made this offer:
“We welcome and will provide
necessary help to all disenchanted
compatriots who are willing to return to
their homes, live peacefully and accept
the Constitution,” with a caveat that
excluded al Qaeda and fighters directly
linked to international terrorism. To
show he was serious, he pledged to
convene another loya jirga to discuss
launching a peace and reconciliation
process.
Most important of all, Karzai
committed to speed efforts to stand up a
capable and effective Afghan national
security force that would be able to
replace American and international
troops over time. “We are determined
that by the next five years, the Afghan
forces are capable of taking the lead in
ensuring security and stability across the
country,” he said. That was what
President Obama had been waiting to
hear.

On November 23, I met with President
Obama, first in a midday Cabinet
meeting, then in a late-afternoon huddle
in the Oval Office with Vice President
Biden, and finally in a nighttime
National Security Council session in the
White House Situation Room. It was the
culmination of months of debate.
I updated the President on my trip to
Kabul, including my discussions with
Karzai. Then I laid out my thinking,
beginning with the premise that we could
not abandon Afghanistan. The United
States had tried that in 1989, after the
Soviets withdrew, and we paid a
grievous price for allowing the country
to become a safe haven for terrorists.
Nor was the status quo acceptable.
American troops were dying, and the
government in Kabul was losing ground
every day. Something had to change.
I supported the military’s proposed
troop increase, combined with a civilian
surge and diplomatic efforts inside both
Afghanistan and the region, to bring the
conflict to an end. I believed more
military forces were crucial to create
space for a transition process to Afghan
responsibility, to provide stability and
security to help build up and strengthen
the government, and to ensure leverage
to pursue a diplomatic resolution.
I shared the President’s reluctance
about an open-ended commitment
without any conditions and expectations.
That’s why I pressed Karzai so hard to
offer a vision in his inaugural address
for a transition to Afghan responsibility
for security. Planning for that transition,
and getting the buy-in of the international
community, would have to be a priority
going forward.
The President listened carefully to all
the arguments presented by those of us
sitting around the table. It was getting
late, and he was still not ready to make a
final decision. But in a few days, after a
final review of the military options with
Gates and Mullen, he would be.
President Obama decided to announce
his new policy in a speech at West
Point. After calling foreign leaders and
briefing members of Congress, I joined
him on Marine One for the short
helicopter ride to Andrews Air Force
Base, where we boarded Air Force One
to New York’s Stewart International
Airport. Then we were back on another
Marine One to West Point. As a rule, I
am not fond of helicopters. They’re loud
and cramped and defy gravity only with
fierce and jarring effort. But Marine One
is different. The cabin of the iconic
green and white Presidential helicopter
feels more like a small plane, with white
leather seats, blue curtains, and space
for a dozen passengers. It’s as quiet as
riding in a car. Lifting off from the South
Lawn of the White House, banking out
over the National Mall, passing so close
to the Washington Monument that it
seems as if you could reach out and
touch the marble—it’s a unique
experience.
On this ride I sat next to Gates and
Mullen, facing Jones and the President,
who read over the speech draft one more
time. This was a President who had been
elected in part because of his opposition
to the war in Iraq and his pledge to end
it. Now he was about to explain to the
American people why he was escalating
our involvement in another war in a faroff country. It had been a difficult
deliberation, but I believed that the
President had made the right choice.
When we arrived at West Point, I took
my seat next to Secretary Gates in the
Eisenhower Hall Theatre in front of a
sea of gray-coated cadets. On Gates’s
right was General Eric Shinseki, the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs. As Army
Chief of Staff in 2003 he had presciently
warned the Bush Administration that
many more troops would be needed to
secure Iraq after an invasion than were
being budgeted for. As a result of his
honesty, Shinseki was criticized,
sidelined, and ultimately retired. Now
here we were, nearly seven years later,
once again debating how many troops
were really needed to achieve our goals.
The President began by reminding the
audience why the United States was in
Afghanistan. “We did not ask for this
fight,” he said. But when al Qaeda
attacked America on September 11,
2001—an attack planned under the
protection of the Taliban in Afghanistan
—war was thrust on us. He then
explained how the war in Iraq had
sapped resources and attention from the
effort in Afghanistan. When President
Obama took office, there were just over
thirty-two thousand American troops in
Afghanistan, compared to 160,000 in
Iraq at the peak of the war. “Afghanistan
is not lost, but for several years it has
moved backwards,” he said. “The
Taliban has gained momentum.” He
reaffirmed our more focused mission in
Afghanistan: to disrupt, dismantle, and
defeat al Qaeda in Afghanistan and
Pakistan and to prevent its capacity to
threaten America and our allies in the
future. Then he explained that he would
send an additional thirty thousand U.S.
troops to carry it out, along with
additional contributions from our allies.
“After eighteen months, our troops will
begin to come home,” he said.
This was a starker deadline than I had
hoped for, and I worried that it might
send the wrong signal to friend and foe
alike. Although I strongly believed in the
need for a time-bound surge and a
speedy transition, I thought there was
benefit in playing our cards closer to our
chests. However, with the pace of
withdrawal unspecified, there was
enough flexibility to get the job done.
The President emphasized the
importance of spurring economic
development in Afghanistan and
reducing corruption, directing us to
focus our assistance in areas, such as
agriculture, that could make an
immediate impact in the lives of the
Afghan people, and to put in place new
standards for accountability and
transparency.
Deputy Secretary Jack Lew was in
charge of marshaling the staff and funds
for our “civilian surge.” Holbrooke and
his team, along with our embassy in
Kabul, mapped out its priorities: giving
Afghans a stake in their country’s future
and providing credible alternatives to
extremism and insurgency. Over the next
year we would triple the number of
diplomats and development experts and
other civilian specialists on the ground
in Afghanistan, expanding our presence
out in the field nearly sixfold. By the
time I left State, the Afghans had made
progress. Economic growth was up and
opium production was down. Infant
mortality declined by 22 percent. Under
the Taliban only 900,000 boys and no
girls had been enrolled in schools. By
2010, 7.1 million students were
enrolled, and nearly 40 percent of them
were girls. Afghan women received
more than 100,000 small personal loans
that allowed them to start businesses and
enter the formal economy. Hundreds of
thousands of farmers were trained and
equipped with new seeds and
techniques.
That day at West Point, I was under
no illusions about how difficult it would
be to turn around this war. But, all things
considered, I believed that the President
had made the right choice and put us in
the best possible position to succeed.
Still, the challenges ahead were
enormous. I looked around at the cadets
filling every seat in the cavernous
theater. They were sitting in rapt
attention as their Commander in Chief
spoke about a war many of them would
soon find themselves fighting. These
were young faces, full of promise and
purpose, preparing to face a dangerous
world in the hope of making America
safer. I hoped we were doing right by
them. When the President finished his
remarks, he stepped into the crowd to
shake hands, and the cadets surged
around him.
8

Afghanistan: To End a
War

Richard Holbrooke was, at heart, a
negotiator. In the 1990s, as he described
in his fascinating book, To End a War,
he bullied, threatened, cajoled, and
drank whiskey with Slobodan
Milošević—whatever it took to force the
Serbian dictator into a smaller and
smaller corner until he finally gave in.
On one difficult day during the peace
talks hosted by the United States in
Dayton, Ohio, when Milošević was
refusing to give an inch, Richard walked
him through a hangar at Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base full of warplanes,
providing a visual reminder of American
military power. The message was clear:
Compromise or face the consequences.
The whole effort was a dazzling display
of diplomatic skill, and a war that had
appeared hopelessly intractable ended.
Richard longed to do for Afghanistan
what he had done for the Balkans:
reconcile the parties and negotiate a
peaceful end to the conflict. He was
aware how difficult that would be; he
confided to his friends that this was the
toughest assignment in a career full of
“Mission: Impossible” moments. But as
he told me from the start, he was
convinced that it was worth trying to
create the conditions for a peace
process. If the Taliban could be
persuaded or pressured to drop their ties
with al Qaeda and reconcile with the
government in Kabul, then peace would
be possible and U.S. troops could safely
come home. At the end of the day,
despite all the influence and involvement
of Pakistan, the United States, and
others, this was not a war between
nations; it was a war among Afghans to
determine the future of their country.
And as Richard once observed, “In
every war of this sort, there is always a
window for people who want to come in
from the cold.”
History tells us that insurgencies
rarely end with a surrender ceremony on
the deck of a battleship. Instead they tend
to run out of steam thanks to persistent
diplomacy, steady improvements in
quality of life for people on the ground,
and unyielding perseverance by those
who want peace.
In my early conversations with
Holbrooke about the possibilities of a
political resolution to the conflict, we
discussed two ways of approaching the
problem: bottom up or top down. The
former was more straightforward. There
was good reason to believe that many
low-level Taliban fighters were not
particularly ideological. They were
farmers or villagers who joined the
insurgency because it offered a steady
income and respect in a country wracked
by poverty and corruption. If they were
offered amnesty and other incentives,
some of these fighters might willingly
come off the battlefield and reintegrate
into civilian life, especially if they grew
weary of absorbing increasing American
military pressure. If significant numbers
could be persuaded to do so, that would
leave mostly the hardcore extremists to
sustain the insurgency—a much more
manageable challenge for the
government in Kabul.
The top-down approach was more
challenging but potentially more
decisive. The leaders of the Taliban
were religious fanatics who had been at
war practically all their lives. They had
close ties with al Qaeda, relations with
Pakistani intelligence officers, and deepseated opposition to the regime in
Kabul. It was unlikely they could be
persuaded to stop fighting. But with
enough pressure, they might realize that
armed opposition was futile and the only
road back to any role in Afghan public
life was through negotiations. Despite
the degree of difficulty, Richard thought
we should pursue both approaches
simultaneously, and I agreed.
In March 2009 the Riedel strategy
review endorsed a bottom-up
reintegration effort, but it rejected the
prospect of a top-down peace process.
The Taliban leaders were “not
reconcilable and we cannot make a deal
that includes them,” it stated. Still, the
review set out some core principles that
would be important guides for either
approach. To be reconciled, insurgents
would have to lay down their arms,
reject al Qaeda, and accept the Afghan
Constitution. And reconciliation should
not come at the expense of Afghanistan’s
progress on gender equality and human
rights or lead to a return of reactionary
social policies.
That was a concern I felt passionately
about, going all the way back to my time
as First Lady and continuing through my
Senate service. After the fall of the
Taliban in 2001, I worked with other
women Senators to support First Lady
Laura Bush’s U.S.-Afghan Women’s
Council and other programs for Afghan
women as they sought new rights and
opportunities. When I became Secretary
of State, I requested that all our
development and political projects in
Afghanistan take into account the needs
and concerns of Afghan women.
Creating opportunity for women was not
just a moral issue; it was vital to
Afghanistan’s economy and security.
While life remained difficult for most
Afghan women, we did see some
encouraging results. In 2001 life
expectancy for women in Afghanistan
was just forty-four years. By 2012 it had
jumped to sixty-two. Mortality rates for
mothers, infants, and children younger
than five all declined significantly.
Nearly 120,000 Afghan girls graduated
from high school in those years, fifteen
thousand enrolled in universities, and
nearly five hundred women joined
university faculties. Those figures are
astonishing when you consider that at the
beginning of the 21st century, they were
close to zero across the board.
Despite this progress, Afghan women
faced constant threats to their security
and status, and not just from the
resurgent Taliban. In the spring of 2009,
for example, President Karzai signed a
terrible new law that dramatically
restricted the rights of women belonging
to the minority Shiite population,
targeting an ethnic group called the
Hazara, which had conservative cultural
traditions. The law, which included
provisions effectively legalizing marital
rape and requiring Shiite women to seek
permission from their husbands before
leaving the house, blatantly violated the
Afghan Constitution. Karzai had backed
the measure as a way of shoring up
support from hard-line Hazara leaders,
which was, of course, no excuse. I was
appalled, and I let Karzai know it.
I called Karzai three times over the
course of two days to urge him to revoke
the law. If the Constitution could be
ignored and the rights of this minority
rolled back, then nobody’s rights were
secure, men’s or women’s. It would
undermine his regime’s moral case
against the Taliban. I knew how much
personal relationships and respect
mattered to Karzai, so I also made clear
that this was important to me personally.
I explained that if he allowed this
outrageous law to stand, it would make
it very hard for me to explain why
American women, including my former
colleagues in Congress, should continue
supporting him. Now I was speaking the
language he understood. Karzai agreed
to put the law on hold and send it back to
the Justice Ministry for review. Changes
were eventually made. Though not
enough, it was a step in the right
direction. To keep faith with Karzai, I
generally kept this kind of personal
diplomacy quiet. I wanted him to know
that we could talk—and argue—without
it ending up in the newspapers.
Whenever I met with Afghan women,
whether in Kabul or at international
conferences around the world, they
movingly told me how much they wanted
to help build and lead their country, as
well as their fears that their hard-earned
gains would be sacrificed as U.S. troops
departed or Karzai cut a deal with the
Taliban. That would be a tragedy, not
just for Afghan women but for the entire
country. So in every conversation about
reintegrating insurgents and reconciling
with the Taliban, I was very clear that it
would not be acceptable to trade away
the rights of Afghan women to buy
peace. That would be no peace at all.
I made the Riedel review’s criteria
for reintegration—abandon violence,
break with al Qaeda, support the
Constitution—a mantra of my
diplomacy. At our first major
international conference on Afghanistan,
in The Hague in March 2009, I spoke to
the assembled delegates about splitting
“the extremists of al Qaeda and the
Taliban from those who joined their
ranks not out of conviction, but out of
desperation.” At an international
conference in London in January 2010,
Japan agreed to commit $50 million to
provide financial incentives to draw
low-level fighters off the battlefield. I
pledged that the United States would
also provide substantial funding, and we
convinced other countries to follow suit.
In an interview in London, I was
asked if “it would be a surprise and
maybe even disturbing” for Americans
to hear that we were trying to reconcile
with some insurgents even as the
President was sending more U.S. troops
to fight the very same Taliban. “You
can’t have one without the other,” I
responded. “A surge of military forces
alone without any effort on the political
side is not likely to succeed. . . . An
effort to try to make peace with your
enemies without the strength to back it
up is not going to succeed. So, in fact,
this is a combined strategy that makes a
great deal of sense.” That had been my
argument during the many debates in the
White House Situation Room about the
troop surge, and it was in keeping with
my beliefs about smart power. But I
recognized that even if this was a wise
strategy, it might be hard to accept. So I
added, “I think underlying your question
is the concern of people who say, well,
wait a minute, those are the bad guys.
Why are we talking to them?” That was
a fair question. But at this point we
weren’t talking about reconciling with
terrorist masterminds or the Taliban
leaders who protected Osama bin Laden.
I explained that all we were doing was
trying to peel off nonideological
insurgents who sided with the Taliban
for the much-needed paycheck.
So far, at least, that was true—for us.
For his part, Karzai followed up on his
statements about reconciliation in his
2009 inaugural address by exploring
direct talks with Taliban leaders. In the
summer of 2010 he convened a
traditional conference of tribal elders
from across Afghanistan to back his
efforts. Then he appointed a High Peace
Council led by former Afghan President
Burhanuddin Rabbani to lead potential
negotiations. (Tragically Rabbani was
assassinated in September 2011 by a
suicide bomber with explosives hidden
in his turban. His son agreed to take his
place on the council.)
One obstacle to these early Afghan
efforts was opposition from elements
within the Pakistani intelligence service,
known as ISI. Elements in the ISI had a
long-standing relationship with the
Taliban, going back to the struggle
against the Soviets in the 1980s. They
continued to provide safe haven for
insurgents inside Pakistan, and
supported the insurgency in Afghanistan
as a way to keep Kabul off balance and
hedge against potential Indian influence
there. The Pakistanis did not want to see
Karzai reach a separate peace with the
Taliban that did not take their interests
into account. And that was just one of the
complications Karzai faced. He also had
to worry about opposition from his
allies in the old Northern Alliance, many
of whom were members of ethnic
minorities such as Tajiks and Uzbeks
and were suspicious that Karzai would
sell them out to his fellow Pashtuns in
the Taliban. It was becoming clear that
lining up all these players and interests
to forge a lasting peace was going to be
like solving a Rubik’s Cube.
By the fall of 2010, Kabul was
buzzing with reports of a new channel
between Karzai and the Taliban
leadership. Karzai’s lieutenants held a
number of meetings with a contact who
crossed the border from Pakistan and
was provided safe passage by Coalition
troops. At one point he was flown on a
NATO airplane to Kabul to meet with
Karzai himself. The man claimed to be
Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour, a
high-ranking Taliban commander, and he
said he was ready to deal. Some
captured Taliban fighters reportedly
were shown a photograph and confirmed
his identity. This was an exciting
prospect.
In October, at a NATO summit in
Brussels, Belgium, Secretary Gates and I
were asked about these reports. We both
emphasized our support for exploring
any credible reconciliation effort, but I
cautioned, “There are a lot of different
strains to it that may or may not be
legitimate or borne out as producing any
bona fide reconciliation.”
Unfortunately my skepticism was
warranted. In Afghanistan the story was
starting to crumble. Some Afghans who
had known Mansour for years claimed
that this negotiator looked nothing like
him. In November the New York Times
reported that the Afghan government had
determined the man was an impostor and
not a member of the Taliban leadership
after all. The Times called it “an
episode that could have been lifted from
a spy novel.” For Karzai, it was a bitter
disappointment.
While the Afghans were going down
one dead end after another, Holbrooke
and his team, including the noted scholar
Vali Nasr, were focused on Pakistan,
which they believed was one of the keys
to unlocking the whole puzzle. We
needed to get the Pakistanis invested in
the future of Afghanistan and convince
them they had more to gain from peace
than from continued conflict.
Richard latched on to a stalled
“transit trade agreement” between
Afghanistan and Pakistan that had been
languishing unfinished since the 1960s.
If completed, it would lower trade
barriers and allow consumer goods and
commodities to flow across a border
most often used in recent years for troop
movements and arms shipments. He
reasoned that if Afghans and Pakistanis
could trade together, maybe they could
learn to work together to combat the
militants who threatened them both.
Increased commerce would boost the
economy on both sides of the border and
offer people alternatives to extremism
and insurgency, not to mention giving
each side more of a stake in the other’s
success. He successfully pushed both
countries to restart negotiations and
resolve their outstanding differences.
In July 2010, I flew to Islamabad, the
capital of Pakistan, to witness the formal
signing. The Afghan and Pakistani
Commerce Ministers sat next to each
other, staring down at the thick green
folders before them that contained the
final agreement. Richard and I stood
behind them, next to Pakistani Prime
Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani. We looked
on as the men carefully signed the
accord and then stood to shake hands.
Everyone applauded this tangible step,
hoping that it could end up representing
a new mind-set as much as a new
business deal.
This was the first building block of a
vision we would come to call “the new
Silk Road,” a network of expanded
commercial and communications links
that would bind together Afghanistan
with its neighbors, giving them all a
stake in promoting shared peace and
security. Over the next few years the
United States committed $70 million to
significantly upgrade key roads between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, including
through the famous Khyber Pass. We
also encouraged Pakistan to extend
“most-favored nation” status to India,
and India to liberalize barriers to
Pakistani investment and financial flows,
both of which are still moving forward.
Given the distrust that exists between
them, getting anything done on the
Pakistan-India front was no easy task.
Electricity from Uzbekistan and
Turkmenistan began powering Afghan
businesses. Trains started running on a
new rail line from the Uzbek border to
the northern Afghan city of Mazar-eSharif. Plans progressed for a pipeline
that one day could ship billions of
dollars’ worth of natural gas from
energy-rich Central Asia across
Afghanistan to energy-hungry South
Asia. All these improvements were
long-term investments in a more
peaceful and prosperous future for a
region too long held back by conflict and
rivalry. It was slow going, to be sure,
but even in the short term this vision
injected a sense of optimism and
progress in places where they were
sorely needed.
In Islamabad, on that trip in July 2010
(and on every other visit there), I pushed
hard to get Pakistan’s leaders to view
the war in Afghanistan as a shared
responsibility. We needed their help in
closing the safe havens from which
Taliban insurgents were staging deadly
attacks across the border. As Richard
kept emphasizing, there was never going
to be a diplomatic solution to the
conflict without Pakistani support. In a
television interview with five Pakistani
television journalists set up in our
Ambassador’s home—part of my plan to
be treated like a punching bag by the
hostile Pakistani press to show how
serious I was about engagement—I was
asked whether it was possible to pursue
such a settlement while still pounding
away at the other side on the battlefield.
“There is no contradiction between
trying to defeat those who are
determined to fight and opening the door
to those who are willing to reintegrate
and reconcile,” I replied.
In fact Richard and I still harbored
hope that top Taliban leaders might one
day be willing to negotiate. And there
were some intriguing developments. In
the fall of 2009, Richard visited Cairo
and was told by senior Egyptian
officials that a number of Taliban
representatives, including an aide to the
top leader, Mullah Omar, had recently
paid them a visit. In early 2010, a
German diplomat reported that he had
also met with the same aide, this time in
the Persian Gulf, and that he seemed to
have a direct line to the elusive Taliban
chief. Most interesting of all, he
reportedly wanted to find a way to talk
to us directly.
Richard thought this was an opening
that needed to be tested, but some of our
colleagues at the Pentagon, CIA, and
White House were reluctant. Many
agreed with the analysis in the Riedel
review that the top leaders of the
Taliban were extremists who could
never be reconciled with the government
in Kabul. Others thought the time was
not yet ripe for negotiations. The surge
had just begun, and it needed time to
work. Some did not want to accept the
political risk of engaging so directly
with an adversary responsible for killing
American soldiers. I understood this
skepticism, but I told Richard to quietly
explore what was possible.
A die-hard baseball fan, Richard
started calling the Taliban contact, who
was later identified by media reports as
Syed Tayyab Agha, by the code name
“A-Rod,” and it stuck. The Germans and
Egyptians both said he was the real deal,
a representative empowered to speak for
Mullah Omar and the Taliban high
command. The Norwegians, who had
contacts within the Taliban, agreed. We
weren’t sure, especially after other
potential channels had turned out to be
duds, but felt it was worth proceeding
cautiously.
In the fall, even as the Afghan
government was spinning its wheels
with the Taliban impostor, we moved
forward with a first exploratory meeting
in Germany under the strictest secrecy.
On a Sunday afternoon in October,
Richard called his Deputy Frank
Ruggiero, who had served as a civilian
advisor with the military in Kandahar,
and asked him to prepare to go to
Munich to meet A-Rod. Ruggiero was in
the car with his seven-year-old daughter,
driving across the Benjamin Franklin
Bridge in Philadelphia. Richard told him
to remember the moment because we
might be about to make history. (That
was classic Holbrooke, with his
irrepressible flair for the dramatic. He
saw himself as wrestling with history
and always believed he could win.)
The day after Thanksgiving Richard
gave Ruggiero his final instructions.
“The most important objective of the
first meeting is to have a second
meeting,” he said. “Be diplomatic,
clearly lay out the redlines authorized by
the Secretary, and keep them negotiating.
The Secretary is following this closely,
so call me as soon as you walk out of the
meeting.” The redlines were the same
conditions I had been repeating for more
than a year: If the Taliban wanted to
come in from the cold, they would need
to stop fighting, break with al Qaeda,
and accept the Afghan Constitution,
including its protections for women.
Those terms were nonnegotiable. But
beyond that, as I told Richard, I was
open to creative diplomacy that could
move us toward peace.
Two days later Ruggiero and Jeff
Hayes from the National Security
Council staff at the White House arrived
at a house arranged by the Germans in a
village outside of Munich. Michael
Steiner, the German Special
Representative for Afghanistan and
Pakistan, was the host. A-Rod was
young, in his late thirties, but he had
worked for Mullah Omar for more than a
decade. He spoke English and, unlike
many Taliban leaders, had some
experience with international diplomacy.
The participants all agreed on the need
to maintain absolute secrecy. There
could be no leaks; if the Pakistanis found
out about this meeting, they might
undermine the talks just as they had
Karzai’s early efforts.
The group talked for six intense hours,
feeling one another out and stepping
carefully around the massive issues on
the table. Could sworn enemies actually
come to some kind of understanding that
would end a war and rebuild a shattered
country? After so many years of fighting,
it was hard enough to sit together and
talk face-to-face, let alone trust one
another. Ruggiero explained our
conditions. The Taliban’s top concern
seemed to be the fate of its fighters being
held at Guantánamo Bay and other
prisons. In every discussion about
prisoners, we demanded the release of
Army Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl, who had
been captured in June 2009. There
would not be any agreement about
prisoners without the sergeant coming
home.
The next day Richard drove out to
Dulles Airport to meet Ruggiero’s plane.
He couldn’t wait to get a firsthand
report, which he would then relay to me.
The two sat down at Harry’s Tap Room
in the airport, and Ruggiero talked while
Richard tore into a cheeseburger.

A few days after Ruggiero’s return from
Munich, on December 11, 2010, he and
Richard came up to my office on the
seventh floor of the State Department to
meet with Jake Sullivan and me about
how to proceed. We were also in the
final stages of the one-year policy
review that President Obama had
promised when he approved the troop
surge. No one would say that things
were going well in Afghanistan, but
there was some encouraging progress to
report. The extra troops were helping
blunt the Taliban’s momentum. Security
was improving in Kabul and in key
provinces like Helmand and Kandahar.
Our development efforts were starting to
make a difference in the economy, and
our diplomacy with the region and the
international community was picking up
steam.
In November I had gone with
President Obama to a summit of NATO
leaders in Lisbon, Portugal. The summit
reaffirmed the shared mission in
Afghanistan and agreed to a trajectory
for transitioning responsibility for
security to Afghan forces by the end of
2014, along with an enduring NATO
commitment to the country’s security and
stability. Most important, the summit
sent a strong message that the
international community was united
behind the strategy President Obama had
announced at West Point. The increase
in American forces, supplemented by
those from our NATO and Coalition
partners, was helping create conditions
for political and economic transitions, as
well as a security handoff and the basis
for a diplomatic offensive. There was a
clear road map for the end of U.S.
combat operations and the continuing
support that we knew would be
necessary for Afghan democracy to
survive. Now we had a secret channel to
the Taliban leadership that appeared
genuine and might one day lead to real
peace talks among Afghans. (My
spokeswoman Toria Nuland, with her
talent for quotable lines, started shorthanding our three mutually reinforcing
lines of effort as “Fight, talk, build,”
which I thought summed it up nicely.)
Richard was excited about our
momentum coming out of Lisbon, and
throughout the policy review process he
repeatedly made his case to all who
would listen that diplomacy needed to
be a central element of our strategy
going forward. On December 11, he was
late to the meeting in my office,
explaining that he had been tied up first
with the Pakistani Ambassador and then
at the White House. As usual, he was
full of ideas and opinions. But as we
talked, he grew quiet and his face
suddenly turned an alarming bright red.
“Richard, what’s the matter?” I asked. I
knew immediately it was serious. He
looked back at me and said, “Something
horrible is happening.” He was in such
physical distress that I insisted he go see
the State Department medical staff,
located on the building’s lower level.
Reluctantly he agreed, and Jake, Frank,
and Claire Coleman, my executive
assistant, helped him get there.
The medical staff quickly sent
Richard to nearby George Washington
University Hospital. He took the
elevator down to the garage and got into
an ambulance for the short drive. Dan
Feldman, one of Richard’s closest aides,
rode over with him. When they got to the
emergency room, doctors found a tear in
his aorta and sent him directly to
surgery, which lasted twenty-one hours.
The damage was severe and his
prognosis was not good, but Richard’s
doctors would not give up.
I was at the hospital when the surgery
ended. The doctors were “cautiously
optimistic” and said that the next few
hours would be crucial. Richard’s wife,
Kati, their children, and his many friends
were keeping vigil at the hospital. His
State Department team volunteered to
take shifts in the lobby to help manage
the flow of visitors and run interference
for Kati. Even as the hours stretched on,
none of them would leave the hospital.
The Operations Center was fielding lots
of incoming calls from foreign leaders
concerned about Richard. Pakistani
President Asif Ali Zardari was
particularly anxious to speak to Kati to
express his concern. He reported that
people all over Pakistan were praying
for her husband.
The next morning, with Richard still
clinging to life, the doctors decided
another surgery was necessary to try to
stop the continued bleeding. We were all
praying. I was staying close to the
hospital, as were so many others who
loved Richard. Around 11 A.M.
President Karzai telephoned from Kabul
and spoke to Kati. “Please tell your
husband that we need him back in
Afghanistan,” he said. As they talked,
Kati’s call waiting chimed. It was
President Zardari, who promised to call
right back. Richard would have been
delighted that so many illustrious people
were spending hour after hour talking
about nothing but him. He would hate to
have missed it.
By late afternoon Richard’s surgeon,
who by coincidence was from Lahore,
Pakistan, reported that Richard was
“inching in the right direction,” although
he remained in critical condition. The
doctors were impressed by his
resilience and marveled at the fight he
was putting up. For those of us who
knew and loved him, that was no
surprise at all.
By Monday afternoon, with the
situation much the same, Kati and the
family decided to join me and President
Obama at the State Department for a
long-scheduled holiday reception for the
diplomatic corps. I welcomed everyone
to the Benjamin Franklin Room on the
eighth floor and began with a few words
about our friend, who was fighting for
his life only a few blocks away. I said
that the doctors were “learning what
diplomats and dictators around the
world have long known: There’s nobody
tougher than Richard Holbrooke.”
Just a few hours later things took a
turn for the worse. Around 8 P.M. on
December 13, 2010, Richard Holbrooke
died. He was just sixty-nine years old.
His doctors were visibly upset that they
had not been able to save his life, but
remarked that Richard had entered the
hospital with uncommon dignity for
someone who had suffered such a
traumatic event. I visited quietly with the
family—Kati; Richard’s sons, David
and Anthony; his stepchildren, Elizabeth
and Chris; and his daughter-in-law,
Sarah—and then went to be with the
crowd of friends and colleagues
downstairs. Teary-eyed people held
hands and talked about the need to
celebrate Richard’s life, while also
continuing the work to which he was so
devoted.
I read aloud to those gathered the
formal statement I had just issued:
“Tonight America has lost one of its
fiercest champions and most dedicated
public servants. Richard Holbrooke
served the country he loved for nearly
half a century, representing the United
States in far-flung war zones and highlevel peace talks, always with
distinctive brilliance and unmatched
determination. He was one of a kind—a
true statesman—and that makes his
passing all the more painful.” I thanked
the medical staff and everyone who had
offered their prayers and support over
the past few days. “True to form,
Richard was a fighter to the end. His
doctors marveled at his strength and his
willpower, but to his friends, that was
just Richard being Richard.”
Everyone started swapping their
favorite Richard stories and reminiscing
about this remarkable man. After a
while, in a move I think Richard would
have approved of, a large group of us
headed over to the bar of the nearby
Ritz-Carlton Hotel. For the next few
hours we held an impromptu wake and
celebration of Richard’s life. Everyone
had great stories to tell, and we laughed
and cried in equal measure, sometimes
all at once. Richard had trained an entire
generation of diplomats, and many of
them spoke movingly about what having
him as a mentor meant to their lives and
careers. Dan Feldman shared with us
that on the way to the hospital, Richard
had said that he considered his team at
the State Department “the best he had
ever worked with.”
In mid-January, Richard’s many
friends and colleagues from across the
world gathered at the Kennedy Center in
Washington for a memorial service.
Among the eulogists were President
Obama and my husband. I spoke last.
Looking out at the large crowd, a
testament to Richard’s genius for
friendship, I was reminded how keenly I
would miss having him by my side.
“There are few people in any time, but
certainly in our time, who can say, I
stopped a war. I made peace. I saved
lives. I helped countries heal. Richard
Holbrooke did these things,” I said.
“This is a loss personally and it is a loss
for our country. We face huge tasks
ahead of us, and it would be better if
Richard were here, driving us all crazy
about what we needed to be doing.”

I couldn’t let Richard’s death derail the
work to which he was so committed. His
team felt the same way. We had been
discussing the idea of a major speech on
the prospects for peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan. I was sure
Richard would want us to go ahead with
it. So we put aside our grief and got to
work.
I asked Frank Ruggiero to serve as
acting Special Representative and sent
him to Kabul and Islamabad in the first
week of January 2011 to brief Karzai
and Zardari on what I was planning to
say. I was about to put a lot of weight
and momentum behind the idea of
reconciliation with the Taliban, and we
wanted them to be prepared. Karzai was
in equal measure engaged, encouraging,
and suspicious. “What are you really
discussing with those Taliban?” he
asked. Just like the Pakistanis, he was
worried that we would cut a deal
without him that might leave him
exposed.
While I worked on the speech with the
team in Washington, Ruggiero headed to
Qatar for a second meeting with A-Rod,
our Taliban contact. We still had
concerns about his legitimacy and ability
to deliver results, so Ruggiero proposed
a test. He asked A-Rod to have the
Taliban propaganda arm release a
statement with some specific language in
it. If they did, we’d know he had real
access. In return Ruggiero told A-Rod
that in my upcoming speech, I would
open the door to reconciliation with
stronger language than any American
official had yet used. A-Rod agreed and
promised to send the message back to
his superiors. Later the statement came
out with the promised language.
Before I finalized my speech, I needed
to decide on a permanent successor to
Holbrooke. It would be impossible to
fill his shoes, but we needed another
senior diplomat to lead his team and
carry the effort forward. I turned to a
widely respected retired Ambassador,
Marc Grossman, whom I had met when
he served in Turkey. Marc is quiet and
self-effacing, a dramatic departure from
his predecessor, but he brought
uncommon skill and subtlety to the job.
In mid-February I flew to New York
and went to the Asia Society, where
Richard had once served as chairman of
the board, to deliver a memorial lecture
in his name, which would in time
become an annual tradition. I began by
providing an update on the military and
civilian surges that President Obama had
announced at West Point. Then I
explained that we were conducting a
third surge, a diplomatic one, aimed at
moving the conflict toward a political
outcome that would shatter the alliance
between the Taliban and al Qaeda, end
the insurgency, and help produce a more
stable Afghanistan and a more stable
region. This had been our vision from
the beginning, and it was what I had
argued for in President Obama’s
strategic review process in 2009. Now
it was moving front and center.
To understand our strategy, it was
important for Americans to be clear
about the difference between the al
Qaeda terrorists, who attacked us on
9/11, and the Taliban, who were Afghan
extremists waging an insurgency against
the government in Kabul. The Taliban
had paid a heavy price for their decision
in 2001 to defy the international
community and protect al Qaeda. Now
the escalating pressure from our military
campaign was forcing them to make a
similar decision. If the Taliban met our
three criteria, they could rejoin Afghan
society. “This is the price for reaching a
political resolution and bringing an end
to the military actions that are targeting
their leadership and decimating their
ranks,” I said, including a subtle but
important shift in language, describing
these steps as “necessary outcomes” of
any negotiation rather than
“preconditions.” It was a nuanced
change, but it would clear the way for
direct talks.
I acknowledged, as I had many times
before, that opening the door to
negotiations with the Taliban would be
hard to swallow for many Americans
after so many years of war.
Reintegrating low-level fighters was
odious enough; negotiating directly with
top commanders was something else
entirely. But diplomacy would be easy if
we had to talk only to our friends. That’s
not how peace is made. Presidents
throughout the Cold War understood that
when they negotiated arms control
agreements with the Soviets. As
President Kennedy put it, “Let us never
negotiate out of fear. But let us never
fear to negotiate.” Richard Holbrooke
had made this his life’s work,
negotiating with an ugly tyrant like
Milošević because that was the best way
to end a war.
I closed the speech by urging
Pakistan, India, and other nations in the
region to support a process of peace and
reconciliation that would isolate al
Qaeda and give everyone a new sense of
security. If Afghanistan’s neighbors kept
viewing Afghanistan as an arena for
playing out their own rivalries, peace
would never succeed. It was going to
take a lot of painstaking diplomacy, but
we needed to play an inside game with
the Afghans and an outside game with
the region.
The speech made a few headlines at
home, but its real impact was in foreign
capitals, especially Kabul and
Islamabad. All sides now knew we were
serious about pursuing a peace process
with the Taliban. One diplomat in Kabul
described the effect as a “seismic shift”
that would encourage all sides to more
actively pursue peace.

The successful U.S. Navy SEAL raid
that killed Osama bin Laden at his
compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, in
May 2011, was a major victory in the
battle against al Qaeda and another low
point in our already badly strained
relationship with Pakistan. But I thought
it might also provide us some new
leverage with the Taliban. Five days
after the raid, Ruggiero met for a third
time with A-Rod, this time back in
Munich. I told him to pass along a direct
message from me: bin Laden was dead;
this was the time for the Taliban to break
from al Qaeda once and for all, save
themselves, and make peace. A-Rod did
not seem distressed about losing bin
Laden, and he remained interested in
negotiating with us.
We began discussing confidencebuilding measures that both sides could
take. We wanted the Taliban to make
public statements disassociating
themselves from al Qaeda and
international terrorism and committing to
participate in a peace process with
Karzai and his government. The Taliban
wanted to be allowed to open a political
office in Qatar that would provide a safe
place for future negotiations and
engagement. We were open to this idea,
but it raised a number of challenges.
Many Taliban leaders were considered
terrorists by the international community
and could not appear in the open without
facing legal jeopardy. Pakistan also had
to agree to allow them to come and go
openly. And there was a good chance
Karzai would see a Taliban outpost in
Qatar as a direct threat to his legitimacy
and authority. All these concerns seemed
manageable, but they would require
careful diplomacy.
As a first step, we agreed to begin
working with the United Nations to
remove a few key Taliban members
from the terrorist sanctions list, which
imposed a travel ban. Soon the UN
Security Council agreed to split the
Taliban and al Qaeda lists and treat them
separately—a direct manifestation of the
distinction drawn in my speech—which
gave us considerably more flexibility.
The Taliban still wanted their fighters
released from Guantánamo, but that was
not a step we were willing to take yet.
In mid-May Afghan officials in Kabul
leaked word of our secret talks and
named Agha as our Taliban contact to
the Washington Post and Der Spiegel, a
German newsweekly. Privately the
Taliban understood that the leak was not
from us, but publicly they expressed
outrage and suspended future talks.
Pakistani authorities, already outraged
over the bin Laden raid, were livid that
they had been left out of our discussions
with the Taliban. We had to scramble to
pick up the pieces. I went to Islamabad
and talked to the Pakistanis for the first
time about the extent of our contacts and
requested that there be no retribution
against A-Rod. I also asked Ruggiero to
fly to Doha and pass a message through
the Qataris to the Taliban urging them to
return to the table. In early July the
Qataris reported that Agha was willing
to return.
Talks resumed in Doha in August. ARod presented Ruggiero with a letter for
President Obama that he said was from
Mullah Omar himself. There was some
debate inside the administration about
whether Mullah Omar was still alive, let
alone in charge of the Taliban and
directing the insurgency. But whether it
was from Omar or from other senior
leaders, its tone and content were
encouraging. The letter said that now
was the time for both sides to make
tough choices on reconciliation and
work to end the war.
There were constructive discussions
about an office in Doha and possible
prisoner swaps. Marc Grossman joined
the talks for the first time, and his
personal touch helped move things
along.
In October, on a visit to Kabul, Karzai
told me and our highly regarded and
experienced Ambassador Ryan Crocker,
with whom he had a good relationship,
that he was enthusiastic about what we
were doing. “Go faster,” he said. In
Washington serious discussions began
about the viability of limited prisoner
releases, although the Pentagon was not
supportive and I was unsure whether we
could secure the conditions necessary to
agree to a Taliban office in Qatar. By
late fall, however, the pieces seemed
finally in place. A major international
conference on Afghanistan was
scheduled to take place in Bonn,
Germany, in the first week of December.
Our goal was to announce the opening of
the office following the conference. It
would be the most tangible sign yet that
a real peace process was under way.
Bonn was part of the diplomatic
offensive I had described in my Asia
Society speech, aimed at mobilizing the
broader international community to help
Afghanistan take responsibility for
meeting its many challenges. Grossman
and his team helped organize a series of
summits and conferences in Istanbul,
Bonn, Kabul, Chicago, and Tokyo. In
Tokyo, in 2012, the international
community committed $16 billion in
economic assistance through 2015 to
help Afghanistan prepare for a “decade
of transformation” marked less by aid
and more by trade. Starting in 2015,
estimated financing for the Afghan
National Security Forces would be more
than $4 billion per year. The Afghans’
ability to take responsibility for their
own security was and remains a
prerequisite for everything else they
hope to achieve in the future.
The Bonn conference in December
2011 turned into a disaster for our peace
efforts. Karzai, ever unpredictable,
turned against the idea of a Taliban
office, berating Grossman and Crocker.
“Why have you not kept me informed of
these talks?” he demanded, despite the
fact that just a few months earlier he had
urged us to accelerate them. Karzai was
once again afraid of being left behind
and undercut. Our plan had always been
for these U.S.-Taliban talks to lead to
parallel negotiations between the Afghan
government and the insurgents. That was
the sequence we had agreed to with ARod and discussed with Karzai. But now
Karzai insisted he wanted his own
people in the room for any future
meetings between the Taliban and us. ARod balked when Grossman and
Ruggiero broached this proposal. From
his perspective, we were changing the
rules of the game. In January 2012 the
Taliban once again pulled out of our
talks.
This time it was not so easy to coax
them back. The peace process went into
a deep freeze. Still, based on various
public statements throughout 2012, there
appeared to be a renewed debate under
way within the ranks of the Taliban over
the benefits of talking versus fighting.
Some key figures publicly accepted that
a negotiated solution was inevitable,
reversing nearly a decade of rejection.
Others, however, were committed to
violent opposition. At the end of 2012
the door to reconciliation remained
open, but only part way.

In January 2013, just before I left office,
I invited President Karzai to have dinner
with me, Secretary of Defense Leon
Panetta, and a few other senior officials
at the State Department in Washington.
Karzai brought along the chair of his
High Peace Council and other key
advisors. We gathered in the James
Monroe Room on the eighth floor,
surrounded by antiques from the early
days of the American republic, and
talked about the future of Afghanistan’s
democracy.
It had been more than three years
since Karzai and I had dined on the eve
of his inauguration. Now I was about to
hand the reins of the State Department
over to Senator Kerry, and another
Afghan election would soon select
Karzai’s successor, or at least that was
the plan. Karzai had publicly pledged to
abide by the Constitution and leave
office in 2014, but many Afghans
wondered if he would actually follow
through on that promise. The peaceful
transfer of power from one ruler to the
next is a crucial test of any democracy,
and it is not unusual in that part of the
world (and many others) for leaders to
find ways to extend their tenure.
In a long one-on-one meeting before
dinner, I urged Karzai to keep his word.
If the government in Kabul could build
more credibility with its citizens,
deliver services, and administer justice
fairly and effectively, it would help
undercut the appeal of insurgency and
improve the prospects for national
reconciliation. That depended on all
government officials, but especially
Karzai, to uphold the Constitution and
the rule of law. Presiding over a
constitutional transition would be an
opportunity for Karzai to cement his
legacy as the father of a more peaceful,
secure, and democratic Afghanistan.
I recognized how difficult this might
be for him. The Rotunda of the Capitol
Building in Washington is home to a
series of soaring patriotic paintings that
depict proud moments from our own
democracy’s early days, from the voyage
of the Pilgrims to the victory at
Yorktown. There is one painting in
particular that I have always thought
spoke to the democratic spirit of our
country. It shows General Washington
turning his back on the offered throne
and giving up his commission as
commander in chief of the Army. He
went on to serve two terms as a civilian
President and then voluntarily stepped
down. More than any election victory or
inaugural parade, that selfless act was
the hallmark of our democracy. If Karzai
wanted to be remembered as
Afghanistan’s George Washington, he
had to follow this example and give up
the throne.
The other topic I raised with Karzai
was the stalled peace process with the
Taliban. Karzai had effectively pulled
the plug in late 2011; I wanted him to
reconsider. If we waited until after U.S.
troops started coming home, we and he
would have less leverage with the
Taliban. Better to negotiate from a
position of strength.
Over dinner Karzai ran through a
litany of familiar concerns: How would
we verify if Taliban negotiators actually
spoke for the leadership? Would
Pakistan be pulling the strings from
Islamabad? Would Americans or
Afghans lead the talks? One by one I
answered his questions. I tried to impart
the sense of urgency I felt to get the
process moving again and suggested a
plan that did not require him to directly
reach an agreement with the Taliban on
opening the office. All he had to do, I
said, was make a public statement
supporting the idea. I would then arrange
for the Emir of Qatar to invite the
Taliban to move forward. The goal
would be to open the office and organize
a meeting between the Afghan High
Peace Council and representatives of the
Taliban within thirty days. If that failed
to happen, the office would be closed.
After much discussion, Karzai agreed.
In June 2013, a few months after I left
the State Department, the Taliban
negotiating office finally opened. But the
new understanding, which had taken
years to reach, collapsed in little more
than a month. The Taliban staged a flagraising ceremony at the office and
proclaimed that it represented the
“Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan,” the
official name of the country in the 1990s
when the Taliban were in power. We
had been clear from the beginning that
using the office in this way would be
unacceptable. Our objective had always
been to strengthen the constitutional
order in Afghanistan and, as I had
assured Karzai, we were vested in the
sovereignty and unity of the country.
Understandably, Karzai was apoplectic.
To him it looked more like the
headquarters of a government-in-exile
than a negotiating venue. It was
everything he had always feared. The
Taliban refused to back down, relations
ruptured, and the office was forced to
close.
Watching all this now as a private
citizen, I am disappointed but not
surprised. If making peace were easy, it
would have been done long ago. We
knew the secret channel with the Taliban
was a long shot, with failure more likely
than success. But it was worth testing. I
believe that we laid a positive
foundation that might help future peace
efforts. There are now a range of
contacts between Afghans and the
Taliban, and we exposed debates inside
the Taliban that I suspect will only
intensify over time. The need for
reconciliation and a political settlement
isn’t going away. If anything, it is more
pressing than ever. The benchmarks we
put down could still guide the way.
I wondered what Richard would have
thought. Up until the end, he never lost
his confidence in the power of
diplomacy to untangle even the toughest
knots. I wish he were still with us,
twisting arms and slapping backs and
reminding everyone that the way to start
ending a war is to begin talking.
9

Pakistan: National
Honor

The secure videoconference room in
the basement of the West Wing fell
silent. Next to me, Secretary Bob Gates
sat in his shirtsleeves with his arms
folded and his eyes fixed intently on the
screen. The image was fuzzy, but
unmistakable. One of two Black Hawk
helicopters had clipped the top of the
stone wall surrounding the compound
and crashed to the ground. Our worst
fears were coming true.
Although President Obama sat
stoically watching the screen, we were
all thinking the same thing: Iran 1980,
when a hostage-rescue mission ended in
a fiery helicopter crash in the desert,
leaving eight Americans dead and badly
scarring our nation and our military.
Would this end the same way? Bob had
been a senior official at the CIA then.
The memory surely was weighing on
him, and on the man across the table,
President Obama. He had given the final
order, directly staking the lives of a team
of Navy SEALs and Special Operations
helicopter pilots and perhaps the fate of
his presidency on the success of this
operation. Now all he could do was
watch the grainy images beamed back to
us.
It was May 1, 2011. Outside the
White House, Washington was enjoying
a spring Sunday afternoon. Inside, the
tension had been building since the
helicopters took off from a base in
eastern Afghanistan about an hour
earlier. Their target was a fortified
compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan,
which the CIA believed might be
sheltering the world’s most wanted man,
Osama bin Laden. Years of painstaking
work by the intelligence community,
followed by months of soul-searching
debate at the highest levels of the Obama
Administration, had brought us to this
day. Now it all rested on the pilots of
those state-of-the-art helicopters and the
Navy SEALs they carried.
The first test had been crossing the
Pakistani border. These Black Hawks
were equipped with advanced
technology designed to allow them to
operate undetected by radar, but would
it work? Our relationship with Pakistan,
America’s nominal ally in the fight
against terrorism, was already very
troubled. If the Pakistani military,
always on a hair trigger out of fear of a
surprise attack from India, discovered a
secret incursion into their airspace, it
was possible they’d respond with force.
We had debated whether to inform
Pakistan about the raid ahead of time in
order to avoid this scenario and the
complete breakdown in relations that
could follow. After all, as Bob Gates
often reminded us, Pakistani cooperation
would continue to be needed to resupply
our troops in Afghanistan and pursue
other terrorists in the border region. I
had invested considerable time and
energy in the Pakistan relationship over
the years, and I knew how offended they
would be if we did not share this
information with them. But I also knew
that elements in the Pakistani
intelligence service, the ISI, maintained
ties to the Taliban, al Qaeda, and other
extremists. We had been burned by leaks
before. The risks of blowing the whole
operation were just too great.
At one point another senior
administration official asked if we
needed to worry about irreparably
wounding Pakistani national honor.
Maybe it was the pent-up frustration
from dealing with too much double-talk
and deception from certain quarters in
Pakistan, or the still-searing memories
of the smoking pile in Lower Manhattan,
but there was no way I was going to let
the United States miss our best chance at
bin Laden since we lost him at Tora
Bora, Afghanistan, in 2001. “What about
our national honor?” I said, in
exasperation. “What about our losses?
What about going after a man who killed
three thousand innocent people?”
The road to Abbottabad ran from the
mountain passes of Afghanistan through
the smoking ruins of our embassies in
East Africa and the shattered hull of the
USS Cole, through the devastation of
9/11 and the dogged determination of a
handful of U.S. intelligence officers who
never gave up the hunt. The bin Laden
operation did not end the threat of
terrorism or defeat the hateful ideology
that fuels it. That struggle goes on. But it
was a signal moment in America’s long
battle against al Qaeda.

September 11, 2001, is indelibly etched
in my mind, just as it is for every
American. I was horrified by what I saw
that day, and as New York’s Senator, I
felt an intense responsibility to stand
with the people of our wounded city.
After a long, sleepless night in
Washington, I flew to New York with
Chuck Schumer, my partner in the
Senate, on a special plane operated by
the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The city was in lockdown, and
we were the only ones in the sky that
day, except for the Air Force fighters
patrolling overhead. At La Guardia
Airport we boarded a helicopter and
flew toward Lower Manhattan.
Smoke was still rising from the
smoldering wreckage where the World
Trade Center once stood. As we circled
above Ground Zero, I could see twisted
girders and shattered beams looming
above the first responders and
construction workers searching
desperately through the rubble for
survivors. The TV images I’d seen the
night before didn’t capture the full
horror. It was like a scene out of Dante’s
Inferno.
Our helicopter set down on the West
Side near the Hudson River. Chuck and I
met up with Governor George Pataki,
Mayor Rudy Giuliani, and other officials
and started walking toward the site. The
air was acrid, and the thick smoke made
it hard to breathe or see. I was wearing a
surgical mask, but the air burned my
throat and lungs and made my eyes tear
up. Occasionally a firefighter would
emerge out of the dust and gloom and
trudge toward us, exhausted, dragging an
axe, covered in soot. Some of them had
been on duty nonstop since the planes hit
the Towers, and they had all lost friends
and comrades. Hundreds of brave
emergency responders lost their lives
while trying to save others, and more
would suffer painful health effects for
years to come. I wanted to embrace
them, thank them, and tell them
everything was going to be all right. But
I wasn’t sure yet that it was.
In the makeshift command center at the
Police Academy on Twentieth Street,
Chuck and I were briefed on the damage.
It was crushing. New Yorkers were
going to need a lot of help to recover,
and it was now our job to make sure they
got it. That night I caught the last train
south before they closed Penn Station.
First thing in the morning in Washington
I went to see Senator Robert Byrd of
West Virginia, the legendary chairman of
the Appropriations Committee, to make
the case for emergency relief funding.
He heard me out and said, “Think of me
as the third Senator from New York.” In
the days ahead he was as good as his
word.
That afternoon Chuck and I headed to
the White House, and in the Oval Office
we told President Bush that our state
would need $20 billion. He quickly
agreed. He too stood by us through all
the political maneuvering that was
required to deliver that emergency aid.
Back at my office the phones were
ringing with callers asking for help to
track down missing family members or
to seek aid. My extraordinary Chief of
Staff, Tamera Luzzatto, and my Senate
teams in D.C. and New York were
working around the clock, and other
Senators began sending aides to help
out.
The next day Chuck and I
accompanied President Bush on Air
Force One back to New York, where we
listened as he stood on a pile of rubble
and told a crowd of firefighters, “I can
hear you, the rest of the world hears you!
And the people who knocked these
buildings down will hear all of us
soon!”
In the days that followed, Bill,
Chelsea, and I visited a makeshift
missing persons center at the 69th
Regiment Armory and a family
assistance center on Pier 94. We met
with families cradling photos of their
missing loved ones, hoping and praying
that they might still be found. I visited
wounded survivors at St. Vincent’s
Hospital and at a rehabilitation center in
Westchester County where a number of
the burn victims had been taken. I met a
woman named Lauren Manning; although
more than 82 percent of her body was
terribly burned, giving her a less than 20
percent chance of survival, through
fierce willpower and intense effort she
fought her way back and reclaimed her
life. Lauren and her husband, Greg, who
are raising two sons, became vocal
advocates on behalf of other 9/11
families. Another amazing survivor is
Debbie Mardenfeld, who was brought to
New York University Downtown
Hospital as an unidentified Jane Doe
after falling debris from the second
plane crushed her legs and caused
extensive injuries. I visited her several
times and got to know her fiancé,
Gregory St. John. Debbie told me that
she wanted to be able to dance at her
wedding, but the doctors doubted that
she’d survive, let alone walk. After
nearly thirty surgeries and fifteen months
in the hospital, Debbie confounded all
expectations. She lived, she walked,
and, miraculously, she even danced at
her wedding. Debbie had asked me to do
a reading at the ceremony, and I will
always remember the joy on her face as
she walked down the aisle.
With equal measures of outrage and
determination, I spent my years in the
Senate fighting to fund health care for
first responders harmed by their time
near Ground Zero. I helped create the
9/11 Victims Compensation Fund and
the 9/11 Commission, and supported the
implementation of their
recommendations. I did all I could to
urge the pursuit of bin Laden and al
Qaeda and improve our nation’s efforts
against terrorism.
During the 2008 campaign both
Senator Obama and I criticized the Bush
Administration for taking its eye off the
ball in Afghanistan and losing focus on
the hunt for bin Laden. After the election
we agreed that aggressively going after
al Qaeda was crucial to our national
security and that there should be a
renewed effort to find bin Laden and
bring him to justice.
I thought we needed a new strategy in
Afghanistan and Pakistan and a new
approach to counterterrorism around the
world, one that used the full range of
American power to attack terrorist
networks’ finances, recruitment, and safe
havens, as well as operatives and
commanders. It would take daring
military action, careful intelligence
gathering, dogged law enforcement, and
delicate diplomacy all working together
—in short, smart power.
All these memories were in my mind
as the SEALs approached the compound
in Abbottabad. I thought back to all the
families I had known and worked with
who had lost loved ones in the 9/11
attacks nearly a decade before. They had
been denied justice for a decade. Now it
might finally be at hand.

Our national security team began
grappling with the urgency of the threat
posed by terrorists even before
President Obama walked into the Oval
Office for the first time.
On January 19, 2009, the day before
his inauguration, I joined senior national
security officials of the outgoing Bush
Administration and incoming Obama
Administration in the White House
Situation Room to think through the
unthinkable: What if a bomb goes off on
the National Mall during the President’s
address? Is the Secret Service going to
rush him off the podium with the whole
world watching? I could see from the
look on the faces of the Bush team that
nobody had a good answer. For two
hours we discussed how to respond to
reports of a credible terrorist threat
against the inauguration. The intelligence
community believed that Somali
extremists associated with Al Shabaab,
an al Qaeda affiliate, were trying to
sneak across the Canadian border with
plans to assassinate the new President.
Should we move the ceremony
indoors? Cancel it altogether? There
was no way we were going to do either.
The inauguration had to go forward as
planned; the peaceful transfer of power
is too important a symbol of American
democracy. But that meant everyone had
to redouble efforts to prevent an attack
and ensure the safety of the President.
In the end the inauguration went off
without incident, and the Somali threat
proved to be a false alarm. But the
episode served as yet another reminder
that even while we were trying to turn
the page on many aspects of the Bush
era, the specter of terrorism that defined
those years required constant vigilance.
Intelligence reports painted a
troubling picture. The U.S.-led invasion
of Afghanistan in 2001 had overthrown
the Taliban regime in Kabul and dealt a
blow to its al Qaeda allies. But the
Taliban had regrouped, staging insurgent
attacks on U.S. and Afghan forces from
safe havens across the border in
Pakistan’s lawless tribal areas. Al
Qaeda’s leaders were likely hiding there
as well. The border region had become
the epicenter of a global terrorist
syndicate. As long as those safe havens
remained open, our troops in
Afghanistan would be fighting an uphill
battle and al Qaeda would have the
chance to plan new international attacks.
This was my logic for appointing
Richard Holbrooke as Special
Representative for both Afghanistan and
Pakistan. Those safe havens were also
fueling increasing instability within
Pakistan itself. A Pakistani branch of the
Taliban was waging its own bloody
insurgency against the fragile democratic
government in Islamabad. An extremist
takeover there would be a nightmare
scenario for the region and the world.
In September 2009 the FBI arrested a
twenty-four-year-old Afghan immigrant
named Najibullah Zazi, who they
believed had trained with al Qaeda in
Pakistan and was planning a terrorist
attack in New York City. He later pled
guilty to conspiring to use weapons of
mass destruction, conspiracy to commit
murder in a foreign country, and
providing material support to a terrorist
organization. It was yet another reason to
be concerned about what was happening
in Pakistan.

I looked into the sorrowful eyes of Asif
Ali Zardari, the President of Pakistan,
and then down at the aging photograph
he held out to me. It was fourteen years
old, but the memories it evoked were as
vivid as the day it was taken in 1995.
There was his late wife, Benazir Bhutto,
the astute and elegant former Prime
Minister of Pakistan, resplendent in a
bright red suit and white headscarf,
holding the hands of their two young
children. Standing next to her was my
own teenage daughter, Chelsea, her face
full of wonder and excitement about
meeting this fascinating woman and
exploring her country. And there I was,
on my first extended trip overseas as
First Lady without Bill. How young I
was then, with a different haircut and a
different role, but just as proud to be
representing my country in a difficult
place halfway around the world.
A lot had happened in the years since
1995. Pakistan had endured coups, a
military dictatorship, a brutal extremist
insurgency, and escalating economic
hardship. Most painful of all, Benazir
was assassinated while campaigning to
restore democracy to Pakistan in 2007.
Now, in the fall of 2009, Zardari was
the first civilian President in a decade,
and he wanted to renew the friendship
between us and between our nations. So
did I. That’s why I had come to Pakistan
as Secretary of State at a time when antiAmerican sentiments were surging
across the country.
Zardari and I were about to go into a
formal dinner with many of Pakistan’s
elite. But first we reminisced. Back in
1995 the State Department had asked me
to go to India and Pakistan to
demonstrate that this strategic and
volatile part of the world was important
to the United States and to support
efforts to strengthen democracy, expand
free markets, and promote tolerance and
human rights, including the rights of
women. Pakistan, which split from India
in a tumultuous partition in 1947, the
year I was born, was a longtime Cold
War ally of the United States, but our
relationship was rarely warm. Three
weeks before I arrived on that 1995 trip,
extremists killed two U.S. Consulate
workers in Karachi. One of the main
plotters in the 1993 World Trade Center
bombing, Ramzi Yousef, was later
arrested in Islamabad and extradited to
the United States. So the Secret Service
was understandably nervous about my
intention to leave the safety of official
government compounds and visit
schools, mosques, and health clinics. But
the State Department agreed with me that
there was real value in that kind of
direct engagement with the Pakistani
people.
I was looking forward to meeting
Benazir Bhutto, who had been elected
Prime Minister in 1988. Her father,
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, had served as Prime
Minister during the 1970s before being
deposed and hanged in a military coup.
After years of house arrest, Benazir
emerged in the 1980s as the head of his
political party. Her autobiography is
aptly titled Daughter of Destiny. It tells
a riveting story of how determination,
hard work, and political smarts enabled
her to rise to power in a society where
many women still lived in strict
isolation, called purdah. They were
never seen by men outside their
immediate family and left their homes
only when fully veiled, if at all. I
experienced that firsthand when I paid a
call on Begum Nasreen Leghari, the
traditionalist wife of President Farooq
Ahmad Khan Leghari.
Benazir was the only celebrity I ever
stood behind a rope line to see. During a
family vacation to London in the summer
of 1987, Chelsea and I noticed a large
crowd gathered outside the Ritz Hotel.
We were told that Benazir Bhutto was
expected to arrive there shortly.
Intrigued, we waited in the crowd for
her motorcade to arrive. She emerged
from the limousine, elegantly swathed
from head to toe in yellow chiffon, and
glided into the lobby, looking graceful,
composed, and intent.
Just eight years later, in 1995, I was
First Lady of the United States and she
was Prime Minister of Pakistan. It turned
out Benazir and I had mutual friends
from her time at Oxford and Harvard.
They had told me she had a sparkle
about her: bright eyes, a ready smile,
and good sense of humor, along with a
sharp intellect. All that was true. She
talked candidly with me about the
political and gender challenges she
faced and how committed she was to
education for girls, an opportunity then
and now limited largely to the wealthy
upper class. Benazir wore a shalwar
kameez, the national dress of Pakistan, a
long, flowing tunic over loose pants that
was both practical and attractive, and
she covered her hair with lovely
scarves. Chelsea and I were so taken
with this style that we wore it for a
formal dinner in Lahore held in our
honor. I wore red silk, and Chelsea
chose turquoise green. At the dinner I
was seated between Benazir and
Zardari. Much has been written and
gossiped about their marriage, but I
witnessed their affection and banter and
watched how happy he made her that
night.
The following years were marked by
pain and conflict. General Pervez
Musharraf seized power in a military
coup in 1999, forcing Benazir into exile
and Zardari into prison. She and I stayed
in touch, and she sought my help to
obtain her husband’s release. He was
never tried on the assortment of charges
against him and finally was released in
2004. After 9/11, under heavy pressure
from the Bush Administration, Musharraf
allied with the United States in the war
in Afghanistan. Yet he had to know that
elements of Pakistan’s intelligence and
security services maintained ties to the
Taliban and other extremists in
Afghanistan and Pakistan that dated back
to the struggle against the Soviet Union
in the 1980s. As I often told my
Pakistani counterparts, this was asking
for trouble, like keeping poisonous
snakes in your backyard and expecting
them to bite only your neighbors. Sure
enough, instability, violence, and
extremism swelled, and the economy
crumbled. Pakistani friends I’d met in
the 1990s told me, “You can’t imagine
what it’s like now. It’s so different.
We’re scared to go to some of the most
beautiful parts of our country.”
In December 2007, after returning
from eight years of exile, Benazir Bhutto
was assassinated at a campaign rally in
Rawalpindi, not far from the
headquarters of the Pakistani military.
After her murder, Musharraf was forced
out by public protests and Zardari swept
into office as President on a wave of
national grief. But his civilian
government struggled to manage
Pakistan’s escalating security and
economic challenges, and the Pakistani
Taliban began expanding their reach
from the remote border region into the
more heavily populated Swat Valley,
just a hundred miles from Islamabad.
Hundreds of thousands of people fled
their homes as the Pakistani military
moved in to beat back the extremists. A
cease-fire agreement between President
Zardari’s government and the Taliban in
February 2009 fell apart after only a few
months.
As their country’s problems
worsened, many Pakistanis directed
their anger at the United States, fueled by
a rambunctious media that trafficked in
wild conspiracy theories. They blamed
us for stirring up trouble with the
Taliban, exploiting Pakistan for our own
strategic ends, and showing favoritism
toward their traditional rival, India. And
those were the most rational claims. In
some polls, approval of America fell
below 10 percent, despite the billions of
dollars in aid that we had contributed
over the years. In fact, a massive new
assistance package passed by Congress
became a lightning rod for criticism in
Pakistan because it was seen as having
too many strings attached. It was
maddening. All the public anger made it
harder for the Pakistani government to
cooperate with us in counterterrorism
operations and easier for the extremists
to find shelter and recruits. But Zardari
proved more politically adept than
expected. He worked out a modus
vivendi with the military, and his was
the first democratically elected
government to complete its full term in
the history of Pakistan.
In the fall of 2009 I decided to go to
Pakistan and take on the anti-American
sentiments. I told my staff to plan a trip
heavy on town halls, media roundtables,
and other forms of public engagement.
They warned, “You’ll be a punching
bag.” I smiled and replied, “Punch
away.”
I have faced my share of hostile
public opinion over the years and have
learned it can’t be wished away or
papered over with happy talk. There
will always be substantive
disagreements between peoples and
nations, and we shouldn’t be surprised
about that. It makes sense to engage
directly with people, hear them out, and
offer a respectful exchange of views.
That might not change many minds, but
it’s the only way to move toward
constructive dialogue. In today’s
hyperconnected world our ability to
communicate with publics as well as
governments has to be part of our
national security strategy.
My years in politics prepared me for
this phase of my life. I’m often asked
how I take the criticism directed my
way. I have three answers: First, if you
choose to be in public life, remember
Eleanor Roosevelt’s advice and grow
skin as thick as a rhinoceros. Second,
learn to take criticism seriously but not
personally. Your critics can actually
teach you lessons your friends can’t or
won’t. I try to sort out the motivation for
criticism, whether partisan, ideological,
commercial, or sexist, analyze it to see
what I might learn from it, and discard
the rest. Third, there is a persistent
double standard applied to women in
politics—regarding clothes, body types,
and of course hairstyles—that you can’t
let derail you. Smile and keep going.
Granted, these words of advice result
from years of trial and error and
mistakes galore, but they helped me
around the world as much as they did at
home.
To help us better tell America’s story
and take on the critics, I turned to one of
the country’s smartest media executives,
Judith McHale, to come on board as
Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy
and Public Affairs. She had helped
found and lead MTV and the Discovery
Channel, and is the daughter of a career
Foreign Service officer. In that capacity
she helped us explain our policies to a
skeptical world, push back against
extremist propaganda and recruiting, and
integrate our global communications
strategy with the rest of our smart power
agenda. She also was my representative
to the Broadcasting Board of Governors,
which oversees the Voice of America
and other U.S.-funded media around the
world. During the Cold War, this was an
important part of our outreach, giving
people locked behind the Iron Curtain
access to uncensored news and
information. But we had not kept up with
the changing technological and market
landscape. Judith and I agreed we
needed to overhaul and update our
capabilities, but it proved to be an uphill
struggle to convince either Congress or
the White House to make this a priority.
I saw my job as pushing Pakistan to be
more committed and cooperative in the
fight against terrorists and helping its
government strengthen democracy and
deliver economic and social reforms that
offered citizens a viable alternative to
radicalism. I had to pressure and
criticize without losing Pakistan’s help
in the struggle that was critical to both
our futures.
Shortly after I arrived in Islamabad in
late October 2009, a car bomb exploded
in a busy marketplace in Peshawar, a
city just ninety miles northwest of us.
More than a hundred people were dead,
many of them women and children.
Local extremists had demanded that
women be banned from shopping in the
market, and the blast seemed designed to
target those who had refused to be
intimidated. Pictures of badly burned
bodies and smoking ruins filled
television screens across Pakistan. Was
the timing coincidental, or were the
extremists sending a message? Either
way, the stakes had just been raised on
an already delicate trip.
The first stop on my itinerary was a
meeting with Pakistani Foreign Minister
Shah Mahmood Qureshi, a short drive
away from the U.S. Embassy through
Islamabad’s well-manicured diplomatic
quarter. Islamabad is a planned city of
wide avenues rimmed by low green
mountains, built in the 1960s to move the
government away from the commercial
hub in Karachi and closer to the military
headquarters in Rawalpindi. Even when
a civilian government is nominally in
charge, the influence of the Army
remains pervasive. One of our traveling
journalists asked me on the plane ride
over, Was I convinced that the Pakistani
military and intelligence services had
cut off all ties with terrorists? No, I said,
I was not.
For years most Pakistanis had
regarded the unrest on their northwest
frontier as distant. The region had never
been under the full control of the
national government, and they had been
much more concerned with the practical
and immediate problems of electricity
shortages and unemployment. But now
that the violence was spreading,
attitudes were starting to change.
At the press conference following our
meeting, Qureshi was distressed by the
bombing and directed his words to the
extremists. “We will not buckle. We
will fight you,” he said. “You think by
attacking innocent people and lives, you
will shake our determination? No, sir,
you will not.” I joined him in
condemning the bombing in strong terms
and said, “I want you to know that this
fight is not Pakistan’s alone.” I also
announced a major new assistance
project to help with the chronic energy
shortages bedeviling the Pakistani
economy.
Later that evening I sat down with a
group of Pakistani television reporters to
continue the discussion. From the first
minute, their questions were suspicious
and hostile. Like many other people I
met that week, they pressed me on the
conditions attached to the large new aid
package approved by Congress. One
might have thought, given the generosity
of the package, especially at a time of
economic hardship of our own, that there
would have been statements of
appreciation. Instead all I heard was
anger and suspicion about why the
money came with “strings attached.” The
bill tripled our assistance, yet many
Pakistanis took issue with its
requirement that military aid be tied to
the country’s efforts to fight the Taliban.
That seemed a reasonable request, but
the Pakistani military reacted negatively
to being told what it could and could not
do with our money. The condition was
seen by many Pakistanis as an insult to
their sovereignty and pride. I was
surprised at the degree of vitriol and
misunderstanding generated around this
issue, and how many people seemed to
be scrutinizing every word of the
legislation for possible slights. Very few
Americans ever read our own laws so
carefully. “I think your PR and charm
offensive is fine, explaining your
position is fine,” one of the journalists
said, but “we believe that the bill had a
sort of hidden agenda.” I tried to stay
patient and calm. This was aid meant to
help people, nothing more. “I am very
sorry you believe that, because that was
not the intention,” I replied. “Let me be
very clear: You do not have to take this
money. You do not have to take any aid
from us.”
Clearly our approach to development
aid in Pakistan was not working. Either
the toxic politics of our relationship had
infected the aid, or the aid wasn’t being
allocated and spent in a way that made a
positive impression on the Pakistani
people, or both.
When I became Secretary, the United
States was funding over a hundred
projects in Pakistan, most of them
relatively small and targeted. Some
were run directly by USAID, but most
were outsourced for implementation to
for-profit contractors, as well as
nonprofits, including private NGOs,
faith-based charities, and research
institutes. The contractors were paid
whether or not their programs produced
verifiable results or furthered our
country’s interests and values. There
were so many American-funded projects
that our embassy couldn’t determine the
total number. It was no wonder
Pakistanis were telling me they could not
see the impact of American efforts.
Both before and after my trip, I
worked with Richard Holbrooke on a
strategy to address these concerns. We
agreed that the entire effort needed to be
streamlined. USAID needed to
consolidate programs into signature
projects with support among Pakistanis
and measurable impacts for both our
countries. Since we were spending ten
times more money in Pakistan than all
other countries combined, it seemed an
easily achievable objective.
Nothing moved quickly enough for my
taste, but USAID announced in April
2012 that it had developed a more
focused and strategic plan for Pakistan
that centered on a reduction in the
number of programs, from 140 in 2009
to thirty-five in September 2012,
emphasizing energy, economic growth,
stabilization, health, and education. That
was at least a step in the right direction.
Throughout my October 2009 visit,
Pakistanis emphasized the human and
financial costs they were bearing in the
fight against terrorism, which many
viewed as America’s war that had been
unfairly imposed on them. Was it worth
the lives of their thirty thousand civilian
and military victims? Couldn’t they just
make a separate peace with the
extremists and live in peace? “You had
one 9/11, and we are having daily 9/11s
in Pakistan,” one woman in Lahore said
to me. I recognized their feelings, and
everywhere I went I paid tribute to the
sacrifices of the Pakistani people. I also
tried to explain why this struggle was as
important to Pakistan’s future as to our
own, especially now that the extremists
were expanding their reach beyond the
border region. “I don’t know any country
that can stand by and look at a force of
terrorists intimidating people and taking
over large parts of your territory,” I told
the students. I asked them to imagine
how the United States would react if
terrorists crossed the border from
Canada and took control of Montana.
Would we accept it because Montana is
remote and sparsely populated? Of
course not. We would never allow such
a scenario anywhere in our country, and
neither should Pakistan.
I also heard a lot of questions about
drones. The use of remotely piloted
aircraft was fast becoming one of the
most effective and controversial
elements of the Obama Administration’s
strategy against al Qaeda and likeminded terrorists in hard-to-reach areas.
President Obama would eventually
declassify many of the details of the
program and explain his policies to the
world, but in 2009 all I could say was
“No comment” whenever the subject
came up. Yet it was widely known that
dozens of senior terrorists had been
taken off the battlefield, and we later
learned that bin Laden himself worried
about the heavy losses that drones were
inflicting.
Within the administration we intensely
debated the legal, ethical, and strategic
implications of drone strikes and
worked hard to establish clear
guidelines, oversight, and accountability.
Congress provided a domestic legal
basis for counterterrorism operations
when it authorized the use of military
force against al Qaeda after 9/11, and
we had an international legal basis under
the laws of war and self-defense. The
administration began briefing all strikes
occurring outside of Iraq and
Afghanistan to the appropriate
committees of Congress. The preference
remained to detain, interrogate, and
prosecute terrorists when those options
were available. But when there was not
the ability to capture individual
terrorists who posed a real threat to the
American people, drones provided an
important alternative.
I agreed with the President when he
said that “this new technology raises
profound questions—about who is
targeted, and why; about civilian
casualties, and the risk of creating new
enemies; about the legality of such
strikes under U.S. and international law;
about accountability and morality.” I
spent time talking about the complexities
of these issues with Harold Koh, the
State Department Legal Advisor, a
former Dean of Yale Law School, and a
renowned expert on international law.
Harold argued that, as with any new
weapon, we needed to put in place
transparent processes and standards
governing their use, in accordance with
domestic and international law and the
interests of U.S. national security. That
America is a nation of laws is one of our
great strengths, and the Supreme Court
has been clear that the fight against
terrorism cannot occur in a “legal black
hole.”
Every individual decision to carry out
a strike was subjected to a rigorous
legal and policy review. There were
times when I supported a particular
strike because I believed it was
important to the national security of the
United States and met the criteria the
President set out. There were other times
when I dissented; my good friend Leon
Panetta, the Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, and I had a shouting
match over one proposed strike. But in
every case I thought it was crucial that
these strikes be part of a larger smart
power counterterrorism strategy that
included diplomacy, law enforcement,
sanctions, and other tools.
The administration did everything it
could to achieve near certainty that
civilians would not be killed or injured.
Despite those efforts, reports of civilian
casualties from drone strikes—often, but
not always, untrue—fueled anger and
anti-American sentiments. Because the
program remained classified, I could not
confirm or deny the accuracy of these
reports. Nor was I free to express
America’s sympathies for the loss of any
innocent life, or explain that our course
of action was the one least likely to harm
civilians, especially when compared to
more conventional military action, such
as missiles or bombers—or the costs of
leaving terrorists in place.
Another common question in Pakistan
was how, after backing Musharraf for so
long, America expected to be taken
seriously about wanting to promote
development and democracy. One TV
journalist called our behavior “rolling
out the red carpet for a dictator.” He and
I went back and forth a bit about George
Bush, Musharraf, and who was
responsible for what. Finally I said,
“Look, we can either argue about the
past—which is always fun to do, but
can’t be changed—or we can decide
we’re going to shape a different future.
Now, I vote that we shape a different
future.” I’m not sure I convinced him, but
by the end of the session the steam
seemed to have come out of the group’s
anger, at least a bit.
After I wrapped up with the
journalists, it was time for meetings and
dinner with President Zardari. That’s
when, in a quiet moment before we went
into the formal dining room in the
Presidential Palace, he produced the
fourteen-year-old photo of me and
Chelsea with Benazir and their children.
The next day I flew to Lahore, an
ancient city full of fantastic Mogul
architecture. Thousands of police lined
the road as we sped into town. I saw
some welcome banners hanging along
the streets, but we also passed crowds
of young men who held signs with
messages like “Hillory go back” and
“Drone attack is terror.”
At a meeting with university students,
I fielded more questions: Why does
America always support India instead of
Pakistan? What can America do to help
with energy shortages and poor
education in Pakistan, and why, again,
does the aid package come with so many
strings attached? Why are Pakistani
exchange students in America
stereotyped as terrorists? How can we
trust America when you’ve let us down
so many times before? I tried to provide
full and respectful answers. “It is
difficult to go forward if we’re always
looking in the rearview mirror,” I
pointed out. The mood in the room was
sullen and aggrieved, with little of the
positive energy I had encountered in
other university visits around the world.
Then a young woman stood up. She
was a medical student and a member of
Seeds of Peace, an organization I have
long supported that is dedicated to
bringing young people together across
cultural divides and conflicts. She
generously thanked me for serving as an
inspiration to young women around the
world. Then she pivoted to a sharpedged question about the use of drones.
She noted the collateral damage inflicted
on Pakistani civilians and asked why, if
these strikes were so important, the
United States couldn’t just share the
necessary technology and intelligence
with the Pakistani military and let them
handle it. I was a little taken aback by
the shift in tone. But looking at her, I
thought back to my own days as a student
who was quick to question authority
figures. Young people often fearlessly
say what the rest of us are thinking but
are too cautious to speak out loud. If I
had been born in Pakistan, who knows,
perhaps I would be standing where she
was now.
“Well, I will not talk about that
specifically,” I responded, mindful of
the limits of what I could legally say at
that point about drones, “but generally,
let me say that there’s a war going on.
And thankfully, there is a very
professional and successful military
effort that has been undertaken by the
Pakistani military. And I’m hoping that
the support that the United States
provides and the courage of the
Pakistani military will bring much of this
to a conclusion. Now, there will,
unfortunately, always be those who seek
to inflict terror, but eventually they can
be eliminated and they can be deterred if
society just abruptly turns against them.
So I think that the war that your
government and your military is waging
right now is a very important one for the
future of Pakistan, and we are going to
continue to assist the government and the
military to be successful in that war.”
I doubt that satisfied her. It was true,
but I couldn’t say what else was in my
head: Yes, Pakistanis had borne a
terrible price in this fight against
extremism, civilians and soldiers alike.
Those sacrifices should never be
forgotten. And thankfully the Pakistani
Army was finally moving into contested
areas like the Swat Valley. But too many
leaders of the Pakistani military and
intelligence services were obsessed
with India and either turning a blind eye
to the Taliban insurgency and other
terrorist groups or, worse, aiding and
abetting them. Al Qaeda was operating
from Pakistani soil with seeming
impunity. So Pakistanis had some hard
choices to make about what kind of
country they wanted to live in and what
they were willing to do to secure it.
I answered all the questions I could.
Even if they didn’t like what I had to
say, I wanted to be sure everyone
understood that America was listening
and responding to their concerns.
Next it was on to another sit-down
with local journalists, and once again I
was playing the role of punching bag. I
heard all the same questions about
America’s lack of respect for Pakistani
sovereignty, and I engaged as honestly
and respectfully as I could. As the press
described it, I “sounded less like a
diplomat than a marriage counselor.”
Trust and respect are two-way streets, I
reminded my questioners. I was
prepared to take an honest view of
America’s record in the region and to
take responsibility for the consequences
of our actions. For example, the United
States had been too quick to walk away
from Afghanistan after the Soviets
withdrew in 1989. Pakistanis also had to
take responsibility and apply the same
scrutiny to their own leaders that they
applied to us. “I don’t believe in dancing
around difficult issues, because I don’t
think that benefits anybody,” I said.
After answering a question about why
we were forcing Pakistan to fight
America’s war without enough help, I
looked around at these journalists, many
of whom were so quick to blame the
United States for all their troubles. “Let
me ask you something,” I said. “Al
Qaeda has had safe haven in Pakistan
since 2002. I find it hard to believe that
nobody in your government knows
where they are and couldn’t get them if
they really wanted to. . . . The world has
an interest in seeing the capture and
killing of the people who are the
masterminds of this terrorist syndicate,
but so far as we know, they’re in
Pakistan.”
For a moment the room was
completely silent. I had just said what
every American official believed to be
true but never uttered out loud. Bin
Laden and his key lieutenants, in all
likelihood, were hiding in Pakistan.
Somebody had to know where. That
evening my statement was repeated
endlessly on Pakistani television, and
government officials in Islamabad
hurried to deny that they knew anything
at all. Back in Washington, Robert
Gibbs, the White House Press Secretary,
was asked, “Does the White House think
it was appropriate for Secretary Clinton
to be as blunt as she was towards
Pakistan in the comments she made about
Pakistan’s unwillingness to find
terrorists within their borders?” Gibbs
responded, “Completely appropriate.”
The next day, in yet another round
with the Pakistani press, I made the point
again: “Somebody, somewhere in
Pakistan, must know where these people
are.”
A few months after I returned from
Pakistan, Leon Panetta invited me to
visit him at CIA headquarters in
Langley, Virginia. I had known Leon and
his wife, Sylvia, for decades. As
Director of the Office of Management
and Budget in the Clinton
Administration, Leon played a big role
in crafting and passing Bill’s successful
economic plan. Then, as Chief of Staff,
he helped steer the Clinton White House
through the difficult period between the
Republican takeover of Congress in
1994 and Bill’s reelection in 1996. A
proud Italian American, Leon is a
shrewd, blunt, and colorful Washington
operator with fantastic instincts and
judgment. I was delighted when
President Obama asked him to return to
government as CIA Director and later as
Secretary of Defense. Now Leon was
reaching out to strategize about our fight
against al Qaeda. The administration’s
military, diplomatic, and intelligence
operations against the terrorist network
were showing results, but he and I both
thought we needed to do a better job of
combating extremist propaganda and
cutting off al Qaeda’s access to finances,
recruits, and safe havens.
I drove out to Langley in early
February 2010. The storied lobby in the
headquarters, re-created in countless spy
thrillers, contains a solemn memorial.
Nearly one hundred small stars are
carved into the marble, each one
memorializing a CIA officer who died in
the line of duty, including many whose
identities remain classified. I thought
back to my first visit to Langley,
representing my husband at a memorial
service in early 1993 for two CIA
officers shot and killed at a traffic light
just down the street. The murderer was a
Pakistani immigrant named Mir Aimal
Kansi, who fled the country but was
later caught in Pakistan, extradited,
convicted, and executed. I had been First
Lady just a few weeks, and the service
at Langley left a lasting impression on
me of the quiet dedication of those who
serve in the CIA.
Now, seventeen years later, the CIA
was grieving again. On December 30,
2009, seven officers were killed in a
suicide bombing at a base in eastern
Afghanistan. Security and Intelligence
officers at the compound were about to
meet with a potentially high-value al
Qaeda informant when he detonated
concealed explosives. The attack was a
terrible blow for the tight-knit Agency
and for Leon himself, who met the flagdraped caskets of the fallen at Dover Air
Force Base in Delaware.
Leon published an op-ed in the
Washington Post defending his people
against unwarranted criticisms of “poor
tradecraft” and explaining, “Our officers
were engaged in an important mission in
a dangerous part of the world. They
brought to that mission their skills,
expertise and willingness to take risks.
That’s how we succeed at what we do.
And sometimes in a war, that comes at a
very high price.” Leon was right, both
about the importance of serving our
country in dangerous places and the
reality of the risks involved. Most
Americans understand that our troops
often must be in harm’s way. But the
same is also true for our intelligence
officers, diplomats, and development
experts, as we were tragically reminded
during my years at State.
When I arrived at Langley for our
meeting, Leon brought me to his seventhfloor office, which looked out over the
woods and sprawl of suburban Virginia
and the Potomac.
Soon we were joined by analysts from
the Agency’s Counterterrorism Center
for a briefing on the fight against al
Qaeda. We discussed how the State
Department could work more closely
with the intelligence community to
counter violent extremism in
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and other hotspots
around the world. The CIA team was
especially eager for our help in the
information wars online and in the
airwaves. I agreed. I still had the angry
complaints of Pakistanis ringing in my
ears. And it drove me crazy that, as
Richard Holbrooke once said, we were
losing the communications battle to
extremists living in caves. Most
important, we had to find ways to slow
the spread of radicalization or more
terrorists would spring up to replace
those we were taking off the battlefield.
We also needed to bring more countries
into the fight against al Qaeda,
especially Muslim-majority nations who
could help counter extremist propaganda
and recruiting. Leon and I directed our
teams to work together to draw up
concrete proposals that we could bring
to the President. Over the next few
months, thanks to the leadership of my
counterterrorism advisor Danny
Benjamin, we developed a four-pronged
strategy.
First, to do a better job contesting the
online space, including media websites
and chat rooms where al Qaeda and its
affiliates spread their propaganda and
recruited followers, we wanted to create
a new Center for Strategic
Counterterrorism Communications
housed at the State Department but
drawing on experts from across the
government. This nerve center in
Washington would link with military and
civilian teams around the world and
serve as a force multiplier for our
embassies’ communications efforts to
preempt, discredit, and outmaneuver
extremist propagandists. We would
expand our small “digital outreach team”
into a battalion of communications
specialists fluent in Urdu, Arabic,
Somali, and other languages who could
do battle with extremists online and
answer anti-American misinformation.
Second, the State Department would
lead a diplomatic offensive to better
coordinate with partners and allies
around the world who shared our
interest in combating violent extremism.
Remarkably, nearly a decade after 9/11
there was still no dedicated international
venue to regularly convene key
counterterrorism policymakers and
practitioners. So we envisioned a
Global Counterterrorism Forum that
would bring together dozens of
countries, including many from the
Muslim world, to share best practices
and address common challenges, such as
how to strengthen porous borders and
respond to ransom demands from
kidnappers.
Third, we wanted to step up training
of foreign law enforcement and
counterterrorism forces. The State
Department already worked with nearly
seven thousand officials from more than
sixty countries each year, and we had
experience building counterterrorism
capacity in Yemen, Pakistan, and other
frontline states. We wanted to do even
more.
Fourth, we wanted to use targeted
development programs and partnerships
with local civil society to try to tip the
balance away from extremism in
specific terrorist-recruiting hotspots.
Over time we had found that recruits
tended to come in clusters, influenced by
family and social networks. We might
not be able to end poverty or bring
democracy to every country in the
world, but by focusing on specific
neighborhoods, villages, prisons, and
schools, we might be able to break the
cycle of radicalization and disrupt the
recruiting chains.
I thought that these four initiatives,
along with aggressive efforts by the
Treasury Department to disrupt terroristfinancing networks, added up to a
coherent, smart power approach to
counterterrorism that would complement
what the intelligence community and the
military were doing. I asked Danny
Benjamin to brief the White House staff
on our plans and to find a time for me to
present our strategy to the President and
the rest of the National Security Council.
Some of the White House national
security aides supported our plan, but
others were concerned. They wanted to
be sure that State wasn’t trying to usurp
the White House’s role as the primary
coordinator of activity across the
various agencies, especially when it
came to communications. Danny
patiently explained that this was
intended to be a highly targeted initiative
to combat extremist propaganda. To
clear the air, as had already been
necessary a number of times, I decided
to present it directly to the President.
In early July, at a regularly scheduled
meeting with President Obama and his
full homeland security and
counterterrorism teams, I presented our
strategy. Danny brought a detailed
PowerPoint presentation that described
the four initiatives and the resources and
authorities we’d need to execute them.
Panetta immediately backed me up,
telling the President that this was exactly
what was needed. Secretary Gates
agreed. Attorney General Eric Holder
and Secretary of Homeland Security
Janet Napolitano also spoke in favor.
Then we turned to the President. I could
see he was a little upset. “I don’t know
what I have to do around here to get
people to listen to me,” he said, with
exasperation. Not a good start. “I’ve
been asking for this kind of plan for
more than a year!” That was a green
light from the top. “We have everything
we need,” I told Danny afterward. “Let’s
get started.”

“We’ve got a lead.”
It was early March 2011, and Leon
Panetta and I were having lunch in a
private dining room on the eighth floor
of the State Department.
Not long before, he had taken me
aside after a meeting in the Situation
Room and said he had something
important to talk about privately. No
staff, no notes. I had offered to pay
another visit to his office at Langley, but
this time he insisted on coming to the
State Department. So here we were at
lunch. I was eager to hear what was on
his mind.
Leon leaned in and said that the CIA
had been tracking the best lead they’d
had in years about the possible
whereabouts of Osama bin Laden. The
Agency had been quietly working this
for some time. Leon had slowly started
telling senior administration officials,
starting at the White House. He went and
saw Bob Gates at the Pentagon in
December. In February, he brought in the
Joint Chiefs and Admiral Bill McRaven,
commander of the Joint Special
Operations Command, whose troops
might be called upon to lead a raid if the
intelligence was strong enough. Now he
was telling me, because he wanted me to
join a small group at the White House to
discuss what to do.
I knew that President Obama had told
Leon shortly after the inauguration that
he wanted the CIA to refocus its efforts
on al Qaeda and finding bin Laden.
Agents and analysts worked triple-time
in Langley and out in the field, and now
it seemed their efforts were yielding
results. It had been nearly a decade since
I stood at the smoldering pile at Ground
Zero, and Americans still wanted
justice. But I also knew that intelligence
is an uncertain business and that
previous leads had failed to pan out.
I couldn’t tell anyone at the State
Department—or anywhere, for that
matter—what was happening, which
created some awkward moments with
my staff. It has been more than twenty
years since I’ve been able to do much of
anything without at least a dozen people
noticing, but with a little misdirection, I
pulled it off.
Our small group met at the White
House multiple times in March and
April. Leon and his team presented the
case that led them to suspect that a
“high-value target,” possibly bin Laden,
was living in a walled compound in the
Pakistani city of Abbottabad, not far
from the country’s premier military
training academy, the equivalent of our
West Point. Some of the intelligence
analysts were highly confident they
finally had their man. Others were far
less confident, especially those who had
lived through the failed intelligence
process that concluded that Saddam
Hussein possessed weapons of mass
destruction. We sifted through the
reports, listened to the experts, and
weighed the probabilities on both sides.
We also debated our options. One
was sharing intelligence with the
Pakistanis and conducting a joint raid,
but I and others thought we could not
trust Pakistan. The President
immediately took that option off the
table. Another was to bomb the
compound from the air. That would pose
little risk to U.S. personnel but was
likely to cause significant collateral
damage in a densely populated
neighborhood, and there would be no
way to determine with absolute certainty
if bin Laden had really been there at all.
Using a targeted missile fired from a
drone or other platform might limit the
damage, but there would still be no way
to recover and identify the body or to
collect any other useful intelligence on
the premises. Worse yet, it could miss,
or not do the trick. The only way to be
certain he was there, and equally certain
that he would be captured or killed,
would be to insert Special Operations
forces deep into Pakistan to raid the
compound. Admiral McRaven’s special
operators were highly skilled and
experienced, but there was no doubt that
this option posed by far the greatest risk,
especially if our men ended up in
conflict with Pakistani security forces,
hundreds of miles from a safe haven.
The President’s top advisors were
split on the wisdom of a raid. Leon and
Tom Donilon, by then National Security
Advisor, ultimately recommended
launching the operation. Bob Gates, who
had spent decades as a CIA analyst,
wasn’t sold. He thought the intelligence
was circumstantial, and he worried that
a blowup with the Pakistanis would
jeopardize the war effort in Afghanistan.
Bob also carried painful memories of
Operation Eagle Claw, the disastrous
botched rescue attempt of hostages in
Iran in 1980 that left eight U.S.
servicemen dead when a helicopter
collided with a transport aircraft. That
was a nightmare scenario that nobody
wanted to see repeated. He thought the
risks of a raid were just too high and
preferred a strike from the air, although
he would eventually change his mind.
Vice President Biden remained
skeptical.
These were difficult and emotional
discussions. Unlike most matters I
handled as Secretary of State, because of
the extreme secrecy of this case there
was no trusted advisor I could turn to or
expert I could call.
I took that seriously, as President
Obama found out when, after the raid
was over but before he went on
television to inform the country, he
called all four living ex-Presidents to
tell them personally. When he reached
Bill, he began, “I assume Hillary’s
already told you . . .” Bill had no idea
what he was talking about. They told me
not to tell anyone, so I didn’t tell anyone.
Bill later joked with me, “No one will
ever doubt you can keep a secret!”
I respected Bob and Joe’s concerns
about the risks of a raid, but I came to
the conclusion that the intelligence was
convincing and the risks were
outweighed by the benefits of success.
We just had to make sure it worked.
That would be the job of Admiral
McRaven. He was a Navy man who had
come up through the ranks, including a
stint leading an underwater demolition
SEAL team. The more I got to know him
and watch him plan this mission, the
more confident I felt. When I asked
about the dangers of the raid on the
compound, Admiral McRaven assured
me that his Special Operations forces
had conducted hundreds of similar
missions in Iraq and Afghanistan,
sometimes two, three, or more in a
single night. Operation Eagle Claw had
been a disaster, but the Special
Operations forces learned from it. The
complicated part would be reaching
Abbottabad without triggering Pakistani
radar and a response from its security
forces stationed nearby. Once his Navy
SEALs were on the ground, they would
get the job done.
The SEALs and the Night Stalkers, the
pilots of the Army’s 160th Special
Operations Aviation Regiment, trained
extensively for the mission, including
two rehearsals on full-sized replicas of
the compound conducted at two different
secret locations in the United States.
There was also a specially trained
Belgian Malinois dog named Cairo who
worked alongside the SEALs.
On April 28, 2011, President Obama
convened our group for one last meeting
in the White House Situation Room. He
went around the table and asked
everyone for their final recommendation.
The President and I are both lawyers,
and I had learned over time how to
appeal to his highly analytical mind. So I
methodically laid out the case, including
the potential damage to our relationship
with Pakistan and the risks of a blown
operation. But, I concluded, the chance
to get bin Laden was worth it. As I had
experienced firsthand, our relationship
with Pakistan was strictly transactional,
based on mutual interest, not trust. It
would survive. I thought we should go
for it.
There was also the question of timing
and logistics. Because the raid had to be
conducted under cover of darkness,
Admiral McRaven recommended
launching on the soonest moonless night,
which would be Saturday, April 30, just
two days away. Some officials raised an
unexpected concern. The annual White
House Correspondents’ Dinner, a highprofile black-tie event at which the
President usually tells jokes in front of a
room full of reporters and celebrities,
was scheduled for Saturday night. These
officials worried about how it would
look to have the President doing a standup routine in case he was needed while
the mission was under way. And if he
canceled or left early, it would look
suspicious and might jeopardize the
secrecy of the operation. Admiral
McRaven, always the good soldier,
gamely promised to make Sunday work
if that was the final decision, although
any further delays would be a major
problem.
I’ve sat through a lot of absurd
conversations, but this was just too
much. We were talking about one of the
most important national security calls the
President would ever make. The mission
was already complicated and dangerous
enough. If the commander of Special
Operations wanted to move on Saturday,
then that’s what we should do. While I
don’t remember exactly what I said,
some in the media have quoted me using
a four-letter word to dismiss the
Correspondents’ Dinner as a concern. I
have not sought a correction.
The President agreed. He said that if
worst came to worst and he had to bow
out in the middle of the dinner, they
could just blame a stomachache. In the
end, fog was predicted for Abbottabad
on Saturday night, and the mission had to
be postponed to Sunday anyway. But at
least it wasn’t for a Washington party.
After the final meeting the President
took time to think it over. The team was
still divided. It was a decision only he
could make. Then he gave the order. The
operation, code-named Neptune Spear,
was a go.

I spent Saturday night at the wedding of
a close friend of my daughter’s. The
bride, a bright young military strategist
fluent in Mandarin who studies the
Chinese military, and her friends are all
smart and engaging young people. It was
a cool spring night, and at the reception
on a rooftop overlooking the Potomac, I
stood off to the side looking at the river
and thinking about what the next day
would bring. Guests kept coming up and
talking to me, and soon I had about a
dozen clustered around. One of them
asked, “Secretary Clinton, do you think
we’ll ever get bin Laden?” I barely
suppressed a double take, startled that he
had asked me that question on this night
of all nights. I responded, “Well, I sure
hope so.”
At 12:30 P.M. the next day, Sunday,
May 1, I took the fifteen-minute drive
from my home to the White House and
joined other senior members of the
national security team in the Situation
Room. White House staff had brought in
food from a local deli, and everyone
was dressed informally. Two of the CIA
officers who had chased bin Laden for
more than a decade joined us; it was
hard to believe their hunt might soon be
over. We reviewed the details of the
operation again, including the calls we
would make afterward.
At 2:30 P.M. Washington time, two
Black Hawk helicopters carrying Navy
SEALs took off from a base in
Jalalabad, in eastern Afghanistan, where
it was 11 P.M. Once they crossed into
Pakistan, three large Chinook transport
helicopters followed with
reinforcements ready to deploy if
needed.
The whir of the Black Hawks’ rotors
cut into the silence of the Abbottabad
night about two minutes before they
swooped in over the compound. Their
approach was visible, fast and low, on
the video screen in a small conference
room where we had gathered, across
from the larger Situation Room. Then,
instead of hovering in the air while the
SEALs “fast-roped” to the ground, as the
plan had called for, one of the Black
Hawks quickly began to lose lift. The
pilot “landed hard,” and the helicopter’s
tail hit the compound wall. (Later the
military was able to pinpoint the
problem: the full-scale practice model
of the compound had a chain-link fence
instead of a stone wall, which changed
the airflow dynamics enough to
compromise the Black Hawk’s
operability.) As if this were not
alarming enough, a second helicopter,
which was supposed to land and drop
SEALs on the roof of the compound, had
to improvise, flew past without
stopping, and landed instead on the
ground outside the compound.
That was as tense a moment as any I
can remember. It conjured up ghosts, not
just of the tragic accident in Iran that
Bob had presciently feared from the
outset, but also the infamous “Black
Hawk Down” incident in Somalia in
1993, in which eighteen American
soldiers were killed in Mogadishu.
Were we about to witness another
disaster for the United States? I thought
about the men risking their lives out
there in the middle of the night on the
other side of the world, and I held my
breath. There is a famous photograph of
that day that shows me holding my hand
over my mouth as we all stared at the
screen. I can’t say for sure at what
moment that picture was taken, but it
does capture how I felt.
Finally we could exhale: the damaged
Black Hawk landed and the SEALs
jumped out, ready to begin the assault. It
was the first of many heroic acts that
night. Admiral McRaven was right: his
team knew how to handle every bump in
the road. The operation was still a go.
We watched on the video feed as the
SEALs improvised, sweeping through
the courtyard of the compound and
heading inside to look for bin Laden.
Contrary to some news reports and what
you see in the movies, we had no means
to see what was happening inside the
building itself. All we could do was
wait for an update from the team on the
ground. I looked at the President. He
was calm. Rarely have I been prouder to
serve by his side as I was that day.
After what seemed like an eternity,
but was actually about fifteen minutes,
word came from McRaven that the team
had found bin Laden and he was “EKIA,” enemy killed in action. Osama bin
Laden was dead.
One of the backup helicopters had
arrived to help ferry the SEALs to
safety, along with bin Laden’s body and
a treasure trove of captured intelligence.
But first they had to blow up the
disabled helicopter they were leaving
behind so none of its advanced
technology could be recovered and
studied. While some of the team planted
explosives, others gathered up all the
women and children who were living in
the compound—the families of bin
Laden and the others—and led them to
safety behind a wall so they would be
shielded from the blast. Amid all the
dangers and pressures of the day, this
humane gesture by our military spoke
volumes about America’s values.
Once he knew the SEALs were back in
Afghanistan and the body had been
confirmed as bin Laden’s, it was time
for the President to address the nation. I
walked with him, Biden, Panetta,
Donilon, Mike Mullen, and Jim Clapper,
the Director of National Intelligence, to
the East Room, a place I had been
countless times for announcements,
musical performances, and state dinners.
Now I was in a small audience watching
the President deliver historic remarks. I
was drained from the emotions and
unrelenting tension of the day, not to
mention the weeks and months that had
led up to it. Listening to the President
describe the successful operation made
me both proud and grateful. As we
walked back through the colonnade that
borders the Rose Garden, we heard an
unexpected roar coming from beyond the
gates. Then I saw a huge crowd of young
people, many of them students from
nearby universities, gathered outside the
White House in a spontaneous
celebration, waving American flags,
chanting, “USA! USA!” Most had been
children when al Qaeda attacked the
United States on 9/11. They had grown
up in the shadow of the War on Terror; it
had been part of their consciousness for
as long as they could remember. Now
they were expressing the emotional
release our entire country felt after so
many years waiting for justice.
I stood still and let the shouts and
cheers wash over me. I thought about the
families I knew back in New York who
still grieved for their loved ones lost on
that terrible day. Would they find some
measure of solace tonight? Would
survivors like Lauren Manning and
Debbie Mardenfeld, who had been so
badly injured, face the future with
renewed optimism and confidence? I
also thought about the CIA officers who
never gave up the hunt, even when the
trail went cold, and about the SEALs
and pilots who performed even better
than Admiral McRaven had promised.
And every one of them came home.

I was not looking forward to the difficult
conversations ahead with the Pakistanis.
As expected, when news spread, the
country was in an uproar. The military
was humiliated and the public inflamed
by what they viewed as a violation of
Pakistani sovereignty. But when I
connected with President Zardari, he
was more philosophical than hostile.
“People think I am weak,” he said, “but I
am not weak. I know my country and I
have done everything possible. I cannot
deny the fact that the most wanted man in
the world was in my country. It is
everyone’s failure that we did not
know.” He emphasized that Pakistan had
been a friend to the United States for six
decades, and he described the fight
against terrorism in deeply personal
terms. “I am fighting for my life and for
the future life of my children,” he said.
“I am fighting the people who killed the
mother of my children.”
I commiserated with Zardari and told
him that a number of senior American
officials were on their way to meet with
him in person. I would come myself
when the time was right. But I was also
firm with him: “Mr. President, I believe
strongly that there can be a way forward
that meets both our interests. We would
both be worse off if our close
cooperation ended. But I want to be
clear, as a close friend and someone
with high regard for you, that finding this
path will require you and your country to
make choices. We want greater
cooperation.”
I would devote intense energy over
the coming months to holding together
our fragile relationship, as did our
Ambassador in Islamabad, Cameron
Munter, and his team. We came close to
a serious rupture quite a few more times,
but the fundamental shared interests that
I had described to my colleagues in our
White House deliberations continued to
bring our two countries back together.
Even without bin Laden, terrorism
would remain a threat neither nation
could ignore. Pakistan still faced a
deadly Taliban insurgency and mounting
social and economic problems.
In November 2011, six months after
the Abbottabad operation, twenty-four
Pakistani soldiers were killed by U.S.
forces in a tragic accident along the
border with Afghanistan. The United
States quickly offered condolences, but
Pakistani emotions ran high. In response
Pakistan’s government closed NATO’s
supply lines into Afghanistan, and the
Parliament launched a review of
relations with the United States. The
Pakistanis wanted a direct apology, and
the White House was unwilling to give
it. Military shipping containers sat idle
for months, creating logistical challenges
for our troops, adding financial costs for
us—$100 million a month—and
depriving the Pakistanis of much-needed
revenue.
With no progress on reopening the
supply lines by the time of the NATO
Summit in Chicago in May 2012, I
suggested to President Obama that we
needed a different approach to resolve
the impasse. He agreed, over objections
from both the National Security Council
and Defense, to let me try. Some of the
President’s advisors, keeping their eyes
on the reelection campaign, were
allergic to the idea of any apology,
especially to the country that had
harbored bin Laden. But to help supply
Coalition troops we needed to sort it
out. I told the President I would absorb
any incoming political attacks. I met
with President Zardari in Chicago and
told him I needed his help to get the
supply lines open, just as his government
needed the payments it received for
permitting convoys to traverse Pakistan.
I dispatched Deputy Secretary Tom
Nides, an experienced negotiator, to sit
down in private with Pakistan’s Finance
Minister. This was one of those calls
where a willingness to recognize error
is not a sign of weakness but a pragmatic
compromise. So I gave Tom clear
instructions: Be discreet, be reasonable,
and get a deal done.
The back channel helped soothe
Pakistani feelings. When I met with
Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar,
who had replaced Qureshi, in Istanbul in
June, I could tell we were close to a
resolution. By early July we sealed an
agreement. I acknowledged the mistakes
that resulted in the loss of Pakistani
military lives and again offered our
sincere condolences. Both sides were
sorry for losses suffered in the struggle
against terrorism. The Pakistanis
reopened the border, allowing us to
conduct the planned drawdown of
Coalition forces at a much lower cost
than if we had had to take a different
route. Tom and the Finance Minister
kept their dialogue going and even
published a joint op-ed exploring
possible areas of cooperation,
especially in economic development.
The negotiations and eventual
agreement over the supply lines offer
lessons for how the United States and
Pakistan can work together in the future
to pursue shared interests. As U.S.
combat troops leave Afghanistan, the
nature of our relationship will change.
But both countries will still have
interests that depend upon the other. So
we’ll need to find ways to work together
constructively. Future disagreements and
distractions are inevitable, but if we
want results we have no choice other
than to stay focused and pragmatic.
Meanwhile al Qaeda had been dealt a
serious blow, though it was not yet
defeated. Because of the operation in
Abbottabad, the SEALs returned with
extensive new intelligence about the
inner workings of al Qaeda. It would
add to what we already understood
about the spread of affiliated
organizations: Somalia’s Al Shabaab,
North Africa’s al Qaeda in the Islamic
Maghreb, and al Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula, which were becoming bigger
threats every day. The death of bin
Laden, and the loss of so many of his top
lieutenants, would certainly degrade the
capacity of al Qaeda’s core in
Afghanistan and Pakistan to stage new
attacks against the West. At the same
time, however, this would shift influence
and momentum to the affiliates, creating
a more diffuse and complex threat.
Faced with this evolving challenge, I
felt even more certain that we needed to
pursue the smart power approach to
counterterrorism I had described to the
President in 2010. At the State
Department we had been quietly
working to develop the tools and
capabilities we would need, including
expanding our counterterrorism office
into a full-fledged bureau headed by an
Assistant Secretary of State. But
working with the rest of the government
could be frustratingly slow. We had to
fight for every penny of funding, and
despite the President’s pointed
comments in July 2010, it took more than
a year to get the White House to issue an
executive order establishing the Center
for Strategic Counterterrorism
Communications. We finally received it
on September 9, 2011. That same day I
visited the John Jay College of Criminal
Justice in New York and delivered a
major speech explaining our strategy to
bulk up the civilian side of
counterterrorism.
Twelve days later, on the sidelines of
the United Nations General Assembly, I
inaugurated the Global Counterterrorism
Forum. Turkey served as cochair, and
nearly thirty other nations joined us,
including Middle Eastern and other
Muslim-majority countries. Early results
over the following two years were
encouraging. The United Arab Emirates
agreed to host an international center
focused on countering violent extremism,
and a center on justice and the rule of
law is set to open in Malta. These
institutions will train police, educators,
religious and community leaders, and
policymakers. They’ll bring together
experts on communications who
understand how to undermine extremist
propaganda, and law enforcement agents
who can help governments and
communities learn to protect themselves
from terrorists. They’ll also work with
educators who can devise curricula free
of hatred and give teachers the tools to
protect at-risk children from recruitment
by extremists.
An early focus of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum was kidnapping
for ransom, which emerged as a top
funding tool for al Qaeda affiliates in
North Africa and around the world,
especially as other financial avenues
were closed off to them. With strong
U.S. support, the Forum developed a
code of conduct that would stop nations
from paying ransoms, which only
encourages more kidnapping. The United
Nations Security Council backed the
code, and the African Union set up
trainings to help security forces across
the region develop alternative tactics.
We made some progress on the
communications front as well. For
example, as the Arab Spring swept
through the Middle East, our new Center
for Strategic Counterterrorism
Communications worked hard to show
that al Qaeda was on the wrong side of
history. One short video clip the team
produced and circulated online began
with a recording of al Qaeda’s new
leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, claiming
that peaceful action would never bring
about change in the Middle East,
followed by footage of peaceful protests
in Egypt and celebrations after the fall of
Mubarak. The video stirred up a flurry
of responses across the region.
“Zawahiri has no business with Egypt;
we will solve our problems ourselves,”
wrote one commentator on the website
Egypt Forum.
This kind of ideological battle is slow
and incremental but important, because
al Qaeda and its terrorist affiliates
cannot survive without a steady flow of
new recruits to replace the terrorists
who are killed or captured and because
unchecked propaganda can ignite
instability and inspire attacks. We saw
this in September 2012, when extremists
whipped up outrage across the Muslim
world over an offensive but obscure
internet video about the Prophet
Muhammad. U.S. embassies and
consulates in many countries were
targeted as a result.
If we step back and take a broader
view, we can see that violent extremism
is bound up with nearly all of today’s
complex global problems. It can take
root in zones of crisis and poverty,
flourish under repression and in the
absence of the rule of law, spark hatred
between communities that have lived
side-by-side for generations, and exploit
conflict within and between states. That
is an argument for America to be
engaged in the hardest places with the
toughest challenges around the world.
PART FOUR

Between Hope and
History
10

Europe: Ties That Bind

There’s a Girl Scouts song I learned in
elementary school: “Make new friends,
but keep the old. One is silver, and the
other gold.” For America, our alliance
with Europe is worth more than gold.
When the United States was attacked
on September 11, 2001, European
nations stood with us without hesitation.
A headline in the French newspaper Le
Monde proclaimed, “We are all
Americans.” The day after the attack,
NATO (the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization) invoked Article V of the
Washington Treaty for the first time in
history, which stipulates that an attack on
one ally is an attack on all of the allies.
After decades of Americans standing
alongside Europeans in places ranging
from Utah Beach to Checkpoint Charlie
to Kosovo, the Europeans were letting
us know that they wanted to be right
there beside us in our hour of need.
Unfortunately, from that high-water
mark, the relationship deteriorated. Most
of our European allies disagreed with
the decision to invade Iraq. Many were
put off by the “you’re either with us or
against us” style of President George W.
Bush’s Administration, exemplified by
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s
dismissive description of France and
Germany as “Old Europe” at the height
of the Iraq debate in early 2003. By
2009 positive views of America across
Europe had eroded significantly, from
83 percent approval in the United
Kingdom and 78 percent in Germany in
2000 to 53 and 31 percent, respectively,
at the end of 2008. Clearly, the new
Obama Administration had our work cut
out for us.
Probably our greatest asset in turning
the tide of European public opinion was
“the Obama Effect.” Across the
continent many Europeans were
incredibly excited about our new
President. As a candidate in July 2008,
he had electrified an enormous crowd of
nearly 200,000 people in Berlin. The
day after the election a French
newspaper headline proclaimed, “An
American Dream.” In fact expectations
ran so high that managing them and
channeling all that positive energy into
lasting progress became an early
challenge.
Despite Bush-era strains, our bonds
ran far deeper than any disagreements
about particular policies. Our European
allies remained America’s partners of
first resort on nearly every challenge.
And above all, this was an alliance of
values, rooted in a deep commitment to
liberty and democracy. The scars of two
world wars and the Cold War were
receding into history, but many
Europeans were still mindful of the great
sacrifices that Americans had made to
keep them free. More than sixty thousand
American soldiers lay buried in France
alone.
The vision of Europe as whole, free,
and at peace had been a goal of every
U.S. administration since the end of the
Cold War. At its heart was the notion
that peoples and countries could move
beyond old conflicts to chart a peaceful
and prosperous future. I had seen how
difficult this could be, how tightly the
chains of history bound entire
generations and societies. I once asked
an official from southern Europe how
things were going in her country. She
started her answer by saying, “Since the
Crusades . . .” That’s how deep
memories ran in many parts of Europe
and indeed around the world, as if the
20th and 21st centuries were just so
much topsoil. Even as memory bound
together neighbors and allies and saw
them through difficult times, it also kept
old hatreds alive and prevented people
from turning their focus to the future. Yet
the people of Western Europe had
shown that it was possible to shake off
the burdens of the past when they
reconciled in the years after World War
II. We saw it again after the fall of the
Berlin Wall, when Central and Eastern
Europe began the process of integration
with each other and with the nations of
the European Union.
By 2009 historic progress had been
achieved across much of the continent,
and in many ways we were closer than
ever to the vision of a whole, free,
peaceful Europe. But it was more fragile
than many Americans may have realized.
Along Europe’s periphery, southern
European economies reeled from the
financial crisis, the Balkans struggled
still with the scars of war, democracy
and human rights were under threat in
too many former Soviet republics, and
Russia under Putin had invaded Georgia,
reawakening old fears. My predecessors
had worked to build our alliances in
Europe and to support the movement
toward greater unity, freedom, and peace
across the continent. Now it was my turn
to pick up the baton and do everything I
could to renew old ties and manage old
conflicts.

Relations between nations are based on
shared interests and values—but also on
personalities. The personal element
matters more in international affairs than
many would expect, for good or ill.
Think of the famous friendship between
Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher
that helped win the Cold War or the feud
between Khrushchev and Mao that
helped lose it. It was with this in mind
that I began reaching out to key European
leaders starting on my first full day at the
State Department. Some I already knew
and liked from my time as First Lady and
Senator. Others would become new
friends. But all of them would be our
valuable partners in the work we hoped
to do.
I began every call with a message of
America’s reassurance and renewed
commitment. David Miliband, the
British Foreign Secretary, caused me to
gulp and smile simultaneously when he
said, “My goodness, your predecessors
have left you with a world of problems.
It’s a Herculean job, but I think you’re
the right Hercules for this task.” I was
flattered (as I was meant to be) but made
clear that what I thought we needed was
renewed partnership and common
action, not a lone mythological hero.
David proved to be an invaluable
partner. He was young, energetic, smart,
creative, and attractive, with a ready
smile. We found our views on how the
world was changing remarkably similar.
He believed in the importance of civil
society and shared my concern for the
growing numbers of out-of-work and
disconnected young people in Europe,
the United States, and around the world.
In addition to becoming good
professional colleagues, we developed a
genuine friendship.
David’s boss was the embattled
Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown,
Tony Blair’s successor. Gordon, an
intelligent and dogged Scotsman, ended
up presiding over the economic
recession that hit Britain hard. He was
dealt a bad hand, including the baggage
of Tony’s unpopular support of Bush’s
decision to invade Iraq. When he hosted
the G-20 meeting in London in April
2009, I could see the strain he was
under. He went on to lose the next
election and was replaced by David
Cameron, a Tory. President Obama and
Cameron took to each other right off,
starting with a private meeting before
Cameron’s electoral victory. They had
an easy rapport and enjoyed each other’s
company. Cameron and I met together a
number of times over the years, both
with and without President Obama. He
was intellectually curious and eager to
exchange ideas about world events, from
the unfolding Arab Spring to the crisis in
Libya and the ongoing debate over
economic austerity versus growth.
For Foreign Secretary, Cameron
chose William Hague, a former leader of
the Tory Party and an implacable
political foe of Tony Blair in the late
1990s. Before the election, when he was
still the Shadow Foreign Secretary, he
came to see me in Washington. We both
started off a bit cautiously with each
other, but, much to my delight, I found
him a thoughtful statesman with good
sense and good humor. He also became
a good friend. I was a fan of his
biography of William Wilberforce, the
chief advocate for ending slavery in
19th-century England. Hague brought to
his job the understanding that diplomacy
is slow and often boring but absolutely
necessary. At a farewell dinner he
hosted for me in 2013 at the British
Embassy in Washington, his toast
included the following gem: “It was a
great former British Foreign Secretary
and Prime Minister Lord Salisbury who
said that diplomatic victories ‘are made
up of a series of microscopic
advantages: of a judicious suggestion
here, of an opportune civility there, of a
wise concession at one moment and a
far-sighted persistence at another, of
sleepless tact, immovable calmness, and
patience that no folly, no provocation, no
blunder can shake.’ ” That pretty well
summed up my experience as America’s
chief diplomat. It also reminded me that
Hague was the David Beckham of
toasting!
Across the English Channel I found
other memorable partners. Bernard
Kouchner, the French Foreign Minister,
was a Socialist physician serving
Nicolas Sarkozy, a Conservative
President. Bernard had started Médecins
Sans Frontières, or Doctors Without
Borders, which provides medical care
in disaster and conflict zones in some of
the poorest places on earth. He was a
key player after the devastating
earthquake in Haiti in January 2010. I
also worked closely with his successor,
Alain Juppé, and later with Laurent
Fabius, appointed by Sarkozy’s
successor, François Hollande, who was
elected in May 2012. Although from
opposing political parties, Juppé and
Fabius were both consummate
professionals and enjoyable company.
Most leaders are quieter in person
than they appear to be on the stage. Not
Sarkozy. He was even more dramatic—
and fun—in person. Sitting in a meeting
with him was always an adventure. He’d
jump up and gesture dramatically as he
made his points, with his intrepid female
interpreter struggling to keep up but
usually managing to mimic him
flawlessly, inflections and all. Sarkozy’s
rapid-fire, almost stream-ofconsciousness soliloquies covered the
waterfront of foreign policy, sometimes
making it challenging to get a word in
edgewise, but I never tired of trying. He
would gossip, casually describing other
world leaders as crazy or infirm; one
was a “drug-addled maniac”; another
had a military “that didn’t know how to
fight”; yet another came from a long line
of “brutes.” Sarkozy was forever asking
why all the diplomats who came to see
him were so unforgivably old, gray, and
male. We would laugh, debate, and
argue, but most of the time we would
end up agreeing on what needed to be
done. Sarkozy was intent on reasserting
France’s place as a top world power
and eager to shoulder more of an
international burden, which I saw in
action in Libya. And despite his
exuberance, he was always a gentleman.
One chilly day in January 2010, as I was
walking up the steps of the Élysée
Palace in Paris to greet him, I stepped
out of my shoe, leaving me barefoot in
front of the press, who gleefully snapped
pictures. He gracefully took my hand and
helped me regain my footing. Later I sent
him a copy of the photograph inscribed,
“I may not be Cinderella but you’ll
always be my Prince Charming.”
The most powerful leader in Europe,
though, was a woman with a
temperament nearly the opposite of
Sarkozy’s: Chancellor Angela Merkel of
Germany. I first met Angela in 1994,
during a visit with Bill to Berlin. She
came from the former East Germany and
was already serving as Minister of
Women and Youth under Chancellor
Helmut Kohl. When she was introduced
to me, she was described as “a young
woman who will go far”—words that
proved prophetic. She and I stayed in
touch over the years, even appearing
together on a German television show in
2003. In 2005 she was elected
Chancellor, the first woman leader of
her country. For all of its vaunted
progressivism on matters like health
care and climate change, Europe can
still feel like the world’s most venerable
old boys’ club, and it was heartening to
see Angela shaking things up.
My admiration for Angela grew
during my term as Secretary of State.
She was decisive, astute, and
straightforward, and she always told me
exactly what was on her mind. As an
accomplished scientist, having studied
physics and earned a doctorate with a
dissertation on quantum chemistry, she
was particularly knowledgeable on
technical issues like climate change and
nuclear power. She brought her curiosity
about the world to every discussion,
armed with questions about events,
people, and ideas—a welcome change
from some other world leaders who
seemed to think they already knew
everything worth knowing.
When the Chancellor visited
Washington for a state visit in June
2011, I hosted a lunch for her at the State
Department and toasted her warmly. In
response she presented me with a
framed German newspaper covering a
recent visit I had made to Berlin. As
soon as I saw it, I started to laugh. The
front page featured a large photo of the
two of us standing side-by-side, but with
our heads cropped out. Two sets of
hands clasped in front of two similar
pantsuits in just the same way. The paper
challenged its readers to guess which
one was Angela Merkel and which one
was me. I had to admit that it was hard
to tell. The framed newspaper hung in
my office for the remainder of my time
as Secretary.
During the worst years of the global
financial crisis, Angela’s leadership
was put to the test. Europe was hit hard
by the crash and faced unique challenges
because of the single currency shared by
many of its nations, the euro. The
weakest economies—Greece, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and Ireland—faced
staggering public debt, anemic growth,
and high unemployment, but they did not
have the monetary policy tools at their
disposal that come from controlling your
own currency. In exchange for
emergency help, Germany, the strongest
economy in the Eurozone, insisted that
these countries take drastic measures to
reduce spending and reform their
budgets.
The crisis posed a difficult policy
dilemma. If these weak economies failed
to get out from under their debts, the
entire Eurozone might collapse, which
would throw the world and our own
economy into turmoil. Yet I also worried
that too much austerity in Europe would
slow growth even further, making it
harder for them and the rest of the world
to climb out of the hole. In the United
States, President Obama responded to
the recession by pushing an aggressive
investment program through Congress to
get growth going again, while working to
reduce the national debt over the long
term. It was reasonable to suggest that
Europe should take similar steps rather
than just cutting spending, which would
contract the economy even more.
I spent a lot of time talking to
European leaders about these
challenges, including Merkel. One could
agree or not with her fiscal and monetary
policies, but it was impossible not to be
impressed with her steely determination.
As I observed in 2012, she was
“carrying Europe on her shoulders.”

The strongest link in the transatlantic
chain was NATO, the military alliance
that included Canada as well as our
European partners. (Many Americans
may take our relationship with Canada
for granted, but our northern neighbor is
an indispensable partner in nearly
everything we do around the world.)
Beginning at the start of the Cold War,
NATO succeeded in containing the
Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact nations
for four decades. After the end of the
Cold War, the Alliance prepared for
new threats to the security of the
transatlantic community. Virtually all of
the former Soviet republics, other than
Russia itself, felt vulnerable without
some security guarantees from the West,
given their fear that Russia might
someday revert to aggressive,
expansionist behavior. Led by the United
States, NATO decided to open the door
to any of the countries to the East. The
Alliance also established a network of
partnerships with many former Soviet
republics and a consultative council
with Russia itself. As the Clinton
Administration made clear at the time,
NATO, while dealing with new
challenges, would still retain what was
called a “hedge” capacity should a
future Russia once again threaten its
neighbors.
While NATO forces were fighting to
bring peace to Kosovo, Bill and I
celebrated its fiftieth anniversary with a
summit of its leaders in April 1999,
hosting the largest gathering of heads of
state ever to meet in Washington. The
meeting marked great optimism about the
future for Europe and NATO. Václav
Havel, the first post–Cold War President
of the Czech Republic and a fierce and
compelling democracy advocate,
remarked, “This is the first summit of the
Alliance that is attended by
representatives of . . . countries that
were members of the Warsaw Pact no
more than ten years ago. . . . Let us hope
that we are thus entering a world in
which the fates of nations are not
decided by powerful foreign dictators
but by the nations themselves.” If not, he
might have added, let us be prepared to
defend the freedom we have gained.
In 2004, seven more former Eastern
bloc nations joined, expanding NATO’s
reach even farther. Two more, Albania
and Croatia, did so on April 1, 2009,
bringing the total membership to twentyeight. Others, including Ukraine, Bosnia,
Moldova, and Georgia, were exploring
the possibilities of future European
Union and NATO membership.
In the wake of Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea in early 2014,
some have argued that NATO expansion
either caused or exacerbated Russia’s
aggression. I disagree with that
argument, but the most convincing voices
refuting it are those European leaders
and people who express their gratitude
for NATO membership. It gives them
greater confidence about their future in
light of the ambitions of Russia’s
President, Vladimir Putin. They
understand that Putin’s claim that
NATO’s open door is a threat to Russia
reflects his refusal to accept the idea that
Russia’s relations with the West could
be based on partnership and mutual
interests, as Boris Yeltsin and Mikhail
Gorbachev believed. Those who give
credence to Putin’s position should
ponder how much more serious the
crisis would be—and how much more
difficult it would be to contain further
Russian aggression if Eastern and
Central European nations were not now
NATO allies. The NATO door should
remain open, and we should be clear and
tough-minded in dealing with Russia.
By the time President Obama took
office, NATO had become a democratic
community of nearly a billion people
stretching from the Baltics in the East to
Alaska in the West. At my first visit to
NATO’s Brussels headquarters in
March 2009, the hallways resounded
with excitement about the “return” of
American engagement. I shared the
feeling and spent many hours with the
NATO Foreign Ministers and NATO’s
Secretary-General, Anders Fogh
Rasmussen, the former Prime Minister of
Denmark, the kind of experienced and
skillful leader that the Alliance needed.
Sometimes there were growing pains,
not all of them serious. Bulgaria, for
example, which joined NATO in 2004,
was a faithful partner in Afghanistan and
other missions. Yet when I visited its
capital, Sofia, in February 2012, Prime
Minister Boyko Borisov was clearly
nervous about our meeting. I knew we
had serious matters to discuss and hoped
nothing was wrong. After all, we were
allies now. “Madam Secretary, I was
very worried when I saw television
footage of you getting off the plane,” he
began. “I was briefed by my chief of
staff that when your hair is pulled back,
it means you’re in a bad mood.” My hair
was in fact pulled back at that very
moment (perhaps invoking bad
memories of KGB agents and
Communist Party apparatchiks). I looked
at the mostly bald Prime Minister,
smiled, and said, “It just takes me a little
longer to do my hair than it takes you.”
He laughed, and with that out of the way,
we went on to have a productive
meeting.
The long war in Afghanistan had taxed
NATO’s capacities and exposed gaps in
its preparedness. Some allies were
slashing their defense budgets, leaving
others (mostly the United States) to pick
up the slack. Everyone was suffering
from the economic crisis. There were
voices on both sides of the Atlantic
asking whether NATO was still relevant
twenty years after the end of the Cold
War.
I thought NATO remained essential
for meeting the evolving threats of the
21st century. America can’t and
shouldn’t do everything by ourselves;
that’s why building partnerships around
common interests and goals was so
important. NATO was still by far our
most capable partner, especially since
its members voted to act “out of area”
for the first time in Bosnia in 1995, a
recognition that our collective security
could be threatened beyond direct
attacks on NATO countries themselves.
And NATO allies sacrificed their blood
and treasure in Afghanistan, a
commitment we should never forget.
In 2011 we were able to show what a
relevant 21st-century NATO looks like
as the Alliance took the lead in the
military intervention to protect civilians
in Libya, working in concert for the first
time with the Arab League and its
member nations. Fourteen allies and four
Arab partners contributed naval and air
forces to the mission. Contrary to the
views of some critics, this proved to be
a successful joint operation. The United
States provided unique capabilities but
our allies—not us—flew 75 percent of
the sorties and were responsible for
striking 90 percent of the more than six
thousand targets destroyed in Libya. That
was a nearly exact reversal of the
distribution of labor a decade before,
during NATO’s intervention in Kosovo,
when the United States was responsible
for 90 percent of the bombing of air
defenses and military targets. And
though Britain and France led the way
with their capable militaries, the effort
extended beyond them. Italy dedicated
seven air bases to hosting hundreds of
allied jets. Belgian, Canadian, Danish,
Dutch, and Norwegian planes, as well as
jets from the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), Qatar, and Jordan, all
contributed to the more than twenty-six
thousand sorties. The Greek, Spanish,
Turkish, and Romanian navies helped
enforce the arms embargo at sea. It was
a true team effort, just as NATO was
intended to be.
If NATO is one of the most successful
military alliances in history, the
European Union (EU) is one of the most
successful political and economic
organizations. In a remarkably short
period of time, countries that had fought
two world wars in the 20th century
agreed to make decisions by consensus
and elect representatives to a shared
Parliament. Despite the EU’s unwieldy
bureaucracy, it is nothing short of
miraculous that it exists and persists.
The EU’s many contributions to peace
and prosperity within and beyond its
borders were honored with a Nobel
Peace Prize in 2012. Individually and
collectively our European partners
accomplish so much around the world.
Norway is second to none in supporting
global public health projects. Ireland, a
land once ravaged by famine, leads the
way on ending hunger. The Netherlands
sets the standard for working on poverty
and sustainable development. The Baltic
states, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania,
provide invaluable support and
expertise to pro-democracy activists
around the world. The Danes, Swedes,
and Finns are champions on climate
change. The list could go on and on.
I wanted to expand our partnership
with the EU, especially on energy and
economics. Early on in President
Obama’s first term, I urged the EU to
start the U.S.-EU Energy Council to
coordinate transatlantic efforts to help
vulnerable countries, particularly in
Eastern and Central Europe, develop
their own energy resources, where
possible, and reduce dependency on
Russian gas. The U.S. and EU also
began discussing a comprehensive
economic agreement that would
harmonize regulations, increase trade,
and spur growth on both sides of the
Atlantic.

None of our relationships in Europe
needed more tending than Turkey, a
country of more than 70 million people,
overwhelmingly Muslim, with one foot
in Europe and one in Southwest Asia.
Modern Turkey, established by Mustafa
Kemal Atatürk out of the disintegration
of the Ottoman Empire after World War
I, was intended to be a secular
democracy oriented toward the West. It
joined NATO in 1952 and was a
reliable ally throughout the Cold War,
sending troops to fight alongside ours in
Korea and hosting U.S. forces for
decades. Yet the Turkish military, which
saw itself as the guarantor of Atatürk’s
vision, intervened a number of times
over the years to topple governments it
saw as too Islamist, too left-wing, or too
weak. Maybe that was good for the Cold
War, but it delayed democratic progress.
Unfortunately the Bush years took a
toll on our relations, and by 2007
approval of the United States had
collapsed to just 9 percent in Turkey, the
lowest in any of the forty-seven
countries surveyed by the Pew Research
Center’s Global Attitudes Project that
year.
Meanwhile, Turkey’s economy was
booming, with one of the fastest growth
rates in the world. As the rest of Europe
staggered under the financial crisis and
the Middle East stagnated, Turkey
emerged as a regional powerhouse. Like
Indonesia, Turkey was testing whether
democracy, modernity, women’s rights,
secularism, and Islam could all coexist,
and people across the Middle East were
watching. It was strongly in the interest
of the United States that this experiment
succeed and that relations between our
countries get back on firmer footing.
I visited Turkey as part of my first trip
to Europe as Secretary. In addition to
meetings with top Turkish officials,
including Prime Minister Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan and President Abdullah Gül, I
reached out directly to the Turkish
people, as I tried to do everywhere. This
was particularly important in countries
where governments wanted to work with
us but large segments of the population
were generally distrustful or antiAmerican. By taking my case directly to
the people, via the mass media, I was
trying to influence attitudes, which, in
turn, could give governments greater
political cover to cooperate with us.
A popular television talk show called
Haydi Gel Bizimle Ol, or Come and
Join Us, invited me to appear as a guest.
Similar in format to The View, it
appealed to a wide cross-section of
Turkish society, especially women. The
hosts, a diverse collection of women,
asked me about serious policy issues as
well as more personal questions. The
discussion was warm, funny, and wideranging.
“When was the last time you fell in
love and felt like a simple person with a
simple life?” one of them wanted to
know. This wasn’t normal fodder for a
Secretary of State, but it was exactly the
kind of topic that might help me connect
to viewers. I talked about meeting my
husband in law school, falling in love,
and building a life together, and also
about the challenge of raising a family in
the public eye. “I think that my favorite
times are when my husband and my
daughter and I are together and we do
simple things,” I said. “I mean, we go to
the movies, we talk and play games
together, card games and board games.
We go for long walks. I try to do that
every chance I can with my husband.
And my daughter is busy with her own
life now, but when she can, she joins us.
So it’s not easy, but I work really hard to
find those quiet times when the
spotlights aren’t on and when you can
just be yourself and be with people that
you enjoy and love. And those are the
best times in life.”
The audience in the room warmly
applauded, and the feedback collected
afterward by our embassy staff was
encouraging. For many Turks who had
become distrustful of America and its
leaders, it apparently was a pleasant
surprise to see the U.S. Secretary of
State as a normal person with cares and
concerns similar to their own. Maybe as
a result they’d be more receptive to what
I had to say about the future of U.S.Turkish relations.
One man in particular held the key to
the future of Turkey and of our
relationship: Prime Minister Erdoğan.
(In the Turkish system, the President is
largely a ceremonial post and the Prime
Minister actually runs the government.) I
first met him when he was Mayor of
Istanbul in the 1990s. He was an
ambitious, forceful, devout, and
effective politician. Turks first elected
his Islamist Party in 2002 and reelected
them in 2007 and 2011. Prime Minister
Erdoğan viewed all three elections as
mandates for sweeping change. His
government aggressively went after
alleged coup plotters in the military and
managed to gain a tighter grip on power
than any of its civilian predecessors.
(The term Islamist generally refers to
people and parties who support a
guiding role for Islam in politics and
government. It covers a wide spectrum,
from those who think Islamic values
should inform public policy decisions to
those who think all laws should be
judged or even formulated by Islamic
authorities to conform to Islamic law.
Not all Islamists are alike. In some
cases, Islamist leaders and organizations
have been hostile to democracy,
including some who have supported
radical, extremist, and terrorist ideology
and actions. But around the world, there
are political parties with religious
affiliations—Hindu, Christian, Jewish,
Muslim—that respect the rules of
democratic politics, and it is in
America’s interest to encourage all
religiously based political parties and
leaders to embrace inclusive democracy
and reject violence. Any suggestion that
faithful Muslims or people of any faith
cannot thrive in a democracy is insulting,
dangerous, and wrong. They do it in our
own country every day.)
Some of the changes under Erdoğan’s
leadership were positive. Motivated by
the requirements of potential EU
membership (which up to now has
remained out of reach), Turkey
abolished state security courts, reformed
the penal code, expanded the right to
legal counsel, and eased restrictions on
teaching and broadcasting in Kurdish.
Erdoğan also announced an intention to
pursue a “Zero Problems with
Neighbors” foreign policy. The initiative
to resolve old regional conflicts and take
a more active role in the Middle East
was advocated by Ahmet Davutoğlu, one
of Erdoğan’s advisors who later became
Foreign Minister. Zero Problems
sounded good, and in many cases it was
constructive. But it also made Turkey
overeager to accept an inadequate
diplomatic agreement with its neighbor,
Iran, that would have done little to
address the international community’s
concerns about Tehran’s nuclear
program.
Despite positive developments under
Erdoğan, there was growing cause for
concern, even alarm, about his
government’s treatment of political
opponents and journalists. Decreasing
room for public dissent raised questions
about the direction Erdoğan was taking
the country and his commitment to
democracy. Opponents were suspicious
that his ultimate goal was to turn Turkey
into an Islamic state with no room for
dissent, and some of his actions gave
support to that fear. His government
jailed journalists at a troubling rate in
his second and third terms and cracked
down hard on protesters for questioning
certain decrees. Corruption remained a
massive problem, and the government
was not able to keep up with the rapidly
rising expectations of its increasingly
worldly and middle-class citizens.
Religious and cultural issues were
particularly sensitive in a country where
Islam and secularism had lived in uneasy
balance and different faith traditions
sometimes felt squeezed. Over the years
I had gotten to know the Patriarch of the
Greek Orthodox Church, His All
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch
Bartholomew, and I respected his
sincere commitment to interfaith
dialogue and religious freedom.
Patriarch Bartholomew viewed Erdoğan
as a constructive partner, but the Church
was still waiting for the government to
return seized Church property and allow
the long-shuttered Halki Seminary to
reopen. I supported the Patriarch’s goal
and made a number of runs at getting
Halki reopened, which sadly hasn’t
happened yet.
When Erdoğan talked about giving
women students the right to wear head
scarves at university, some saw it as a
step forward for religious freedom and a
woman’s right to choose her own
course. Others saw it as a blow to
secularism, a sign of creeping theocracy
that would ultimately curtail women’s
rights. It speaks to the deep
contradictions in 21st-century Turkey
that both views may be correct. Erdoğan
himself was very proud of his own
accomplished daughters, who wore
veils, and he asked my advice about one
of them pursuing graduate studies in the
United States.
I spent hours talking with Erdoğan,
often accompanied only by Davutoğlu,
who served as our interpreter.
Davutoğlu is an exuberant academic
turned diplomat and politician, and his
writings about how Turkey could regain
a position of global importance
dovetailed with Erdoğan’s own thoughts.
He brought passion and erudition to his
position, and we developed a productive
and friendly working relationship that,
though strained numerous times, never
ruptured.
In my four years as Secretary, Turkey
proved to be an important and at times
frustrating partner. Sometimes we
agreed (working closely together on
Afghanistan, counterterrorism, Syria,
and other issues), and other times we did
not (Iran’s nuclear program).
Time and attention from both
President Obama and me helped
stabilize our relationship, but external
events, especially heightened tensions
with Israel, presented new challenges.
And Turkey’s internal dynamics
continued to roil. Large protests against
Erdoğan’s increasingly heavy-handed
rule erupted in 2013, followed by a
wide-ranging corruption investigation
that ensnared a number of his senior
Ministers. As of this writing, despite his
increasing authoritarianism, Erdoğan’s
support in more conservative areas of
Turkey remains strong. Turkey’s future
direction is uncertain. But what is
certain is that Turkey will continue to
play a significant role in both the Middle
East and Europe. And our relationship
will remain of vital importance to the
United States.

A Zero Problems foreign policy was an
ambitious goal, especially because
Turkey was entangled in a number of
long-running disputes with its neighbors.
There was the bitter standoff with
Greece over the Mediterranean island
nation of Cyprus that had dragged on for
decades. There was also the emotionally
charged conflict with Armenia, a small,
landlocked former Soviet republic in the
Caucasus to Turkey’s east. These were
both examples of how old enmities
could hold back new progress.
Turkey and Armenia never
established official diplomatic relations
when Armenia emerged as an
independent nation after the breakup of
the Soviet Union. Tensions were further
heightened by Armenia’s war in the
early 1990s with Turkey’s ally
Azerbaijan over a contested strip of land
called Nagorno-Karabakh. That dispute
still occasionally flares into hostilities
between soldiers on both sides of the
border.
Disputes such as Turkey-Armenia and
Nagorno-Karabakh are sometimes called
“frozen conflicts” because they have
been going on for years with little hope
of resolution. When I looked at all the
challenges we faced in Europe and
around the world, it was tempting to just
ignore these trouble spots as insoluble.
But they each had broader strategic
consequences. For example, conflict in
the Caucasus posed problems for our
plans for piping Central Asian natural
gas to European markets to lessen their
dependence on Russian energy.
Collectively these conflicts represented
obstacles to the Europe we were trying
to help build. I thought Turkey’s Zero
Problems strategy might create an
opening to negotiate—and perhaps even
resolve—some of these frozen conflicts,
so I asked my Assistant Secretary for
European and Eurasian Affairs Phil
Gordon to see what we could do.
Throughout 2009 we worked closely
with European partners, including
Switzerland, France, Russia, and the EU,
to support negotiations between Turkey
and Armenia, which we hoped would
lead to establishing formal diplomatic
relations and opening the border to
trade. I spoke on the phone with officials
from both countries nearly thirty times in
my first several months on the job and
conferred in person with Davutoğlu and
the Armenian Foreign Minister Edward
Nalbandian.
Hard-liners in both countries were
implacably opposed to compromise and
put considerable pressure on each
government not to make a deal. Yet over
the spring and summer, thanks largely to
the efforts of the Swiss, the terms of an
agreement that would jointly open the
border were coming into focus. Plans
were made for a formal signing
ceremony in Switzerland in October,
after which the agreement would be
submitted to both countries’ Parliaments
for ratification. As the date approached,
we stepped up our encouragement,
including a call from President Obama
to the President of Armenia. Everything
seemed to be falling into place.
On October 9, I flew to Zurich to
witness the accord signing alongside the
Foreign Ministers of France, Russia, and
Switzerland and the EU High
Representative. The next afternoon I left
my hotel and headed to the University of
Zurich for the ceremony. But there was a
problem. Nalbandian, the Armenian
Minister, was balking. He was worried
about what Davutoğlu planned to say at
the signing and suddenly was refusing to
leave the hotel. It seemed as if months of
careful negotiations might fall apart. My
motorcade turned around and raced back
to Zurich’s Dolder Grand Hotel. While I
waited in the car, Phil Gordon went
upstairs along with the lead Swiss
negotiator to find Nalbandian and take
him to the signing ceremony. But he
wouldn’t budge. Phil came back
downstairs to report and joined me in
the car, which was now parked behind
the hotel. I started working the phones.
On one cell I dialed Nalbandian, and I
got Davutoğlu on a second line. We went
back and forth for an hour, trying to
bridge the gap and coax Nalbandian out
of his room. “This is too important, this
has to be seen through, we have come
too far,” I told them.
Finally I went upstairs to talk to
Nalbandian in person. What if we
simply canceled the speaking portion of
the event? Sign the document, make no
statements, and leave. Both sides agreed,
and Nalbandian at last emerged. We
walked downstairs, and he got in my
sedan to drive to the university. It took
another hour and a half of hand-holding
and arm-twisting at the site to get them to
actually walk onstage. We were three
hours late, but at least we were there.
We held the expedited signing ceremony,
and then, with a huge sense of relief,
everyone left as fast as they could. To
date, neither country has ratified the
protocols, and the process remains
stalled; however, at a December 2013
conference, the Turkish and Armenian
Foreign Ministers met for two hours to
discuss how to move forward, and I still
hope for a breakthrough.
On my way to the airport after the
signing, President Obama called to offer
his congratulations. It hadn’t been pretty,
but we’d taken a step forward for a
sensitive region. Later the New York
Times described my efforts that
afternoon as “down-to-the-wire,
limousine diplomacy.” My car wasn’t a
limousine, but apart from that, it was an
apt description.

The Balkan wars of the 1990s provide a
searing reminder that old hatreds in
Europe can erupt into new and
devastating violence.
When I visited Bosnia in October
2010 as part of a three-day trip through
the Balkans, I was both pleased by the
progress I saw and sobered by how
much there still was to do. Children
could now go to school in safety and
parents could go to work, but there
weren’t enough good jobs, and economic
hardship and discontent simmered. The
virulent ethnic and religious hatreds that
fueled the wars had cooled, but
dangerous currents of sectarianism and
nationalism persisted. The country was a
federation of two republics, one
dominated by Bosnian Muslims and
Croats, the other dominated by Bosnian
Serbs. The Bosnian Serbs thwarted all
attempts to remove roadblocks to growth
and good governance, in the stubborn
hope that they could one day become a
part of Serbia or even an independent
country. The promise of greater stability
and opportunity represented by
integration into the EU or NATO
remained out of reach.
In Sarajevo I participated in an open
discussion with students and civil
society leaders at the historic National
Theater, which had escaped serious
damage in the war. One young man rose
to speak about his visit to the United
States as part of an exchange program
sponsored by the State Department and
hosted by American colleges and
universities. He called it “easily one of
the best experiences” of his life and
implored me to keep supporting and
expanding academic exchanges. When I
asked him to elaborate on why he
thought it was so important, he said,
“The main thing that we learned was to
choose tolerance over intolerance, to
work with each other to respect
everyone equally. . . . We had
participants from Kosovo and from
Serbia at the same time, and they didn’t
care about the issues that their countries
are going through because they realized .
. . we are friends, we can have a
dialogue, we can interact together; it’s
not a problem if you really want to do
it.” I loved the simple phrase “choose
tolerance over intolerance.” It captured
perfectly the transition the people of the
Balkans were still making. It was the
only way to heal their—or any—old
wounds.
Next it was on to Kosovo. In the
1990s, Kosovo was part of Serbia, and
its majority–ethnic Albanian population
faced brutal attacks and forced expulsion
by Milošević’s forces. In 1999, a U.S.led NATO air campaign bombed
Serbian troops and cities, including
Belgrade, to stop the ethnic cleansing. In
2008, Kosovo declared its independence
and was recognized as a new nation by
much of the international community. But
Serbia refused to recognize Kosovo’s
independence and continued to exert
significant influence in the northern
border region, where many ethnic Serbs
lived. The majority of hospitals,
schools, and even courts there continued
to be run and financed from Belgrade,
and Serbian security forces provided
protection, all of which undermined
Kosovo’s sovereignty, exacerbated the
country’s internal divisions, and strained
relations between the two neighbors.
The tense situation was getting in the
way of the economic and social progress
both countries needed to make on their
own, including moving toward EU
membership. But old histories and
hatreds were proving difficult to
transcend. One goal of my visit was to
nudge both sides toward a resolution.
When I arrived in Pristina, Kosovo’s
capital, enthusiastic crowds waving
American flags lined the road from the
airport, cheering as our motorcade
passed, often with children sitting on
adults’ shoulders so they could see. By
the time we reached the plaza in town,
which features a monumental statue of
Bill, the crowds were so dense our
motorcade had to stop. I was glad it did;
I wanted to say hello. So I jumped out
and started shaking hands and hugging
and being hugged. Across the plaza was
an adorable little clothing boutique with
a familiar name: Hillary. I couldn’t
resist a quick visit. The shopkeeper said
they named the store after me “so that
Bill wouldn’t be lonely in the square.”
A few months later, in March 2011,
representatives from Kosovo and Serbia
sat down together in Brussels under the
auspices of the European Union. It was
the first time they had ever talked
directly and at length with each other in
this way. American diplomats were
present for every meeting, urging both
sides to make the compromises that
could lead to normalized relations and
open the door to eventual EU
membership. That was possible only if
the border issues were resolved. The
talks continued for eighteen months.
Negotiators reached modest agreements
on freedom of movement, customs, and
border management. While Serbia still
wouldn’t recognize Kosovo’s
independence, it dropped its objections
to Kosovo’s participating in regional
conferences. At the same time, I was
urging NATO to continue its military
mission in Kosovo, where around five
thousand peace-supporting troops from
thirty-one countries have remained since
June 1999.
The main issues remained unresolved
when a new nationalist government was
elected in Serbia in the spring of 2012.
Cathy Ashton, the EU’s top foreign
policy official (its first High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy), and I decided to travel
together to both countries to see if we
could break the impasse and speed a
final settlement.
Cathy was an invaluable partner on
this and many other issues. In Britain she
had served as leader of the House of
Lords and Lord President of the Council
under Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
Then, following a year as the European
Commissioner of Trade, she was
selected for the EU foreign affairs
position—a bit of a surprise because,
like me, she was not a traditional career
diplomat, but she turned out to be an
effective and creative partner. Down-toearth (especially for a Baroness, I would
kid her), she was easy to get along with,
and we worked closely together not only
on European issues but also on Iran and
the Middle East. We’d also catch each
other’s attention in a large meeting when
one of our male colleagues
unintentionally, even unconsciously,
slipped in a sexist remark, and we
slowly roll our eyes together.
In October 2012, we made the rounds
in the Balkans together. We urged each
country to advance concrete measures to
normalize relations. Kosovar Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi told us, “Today
Kosovo is still not the Kosovo of our
dreams. We are persistently working for
a European Kosovo, for a Euro-Atlantic
Kosovo. We are conscious that we need
to do more.” Cathy and I also met with
representatives of the ethnic Serbian
minority at a Serbian Orthodox church in
Pristina, which had been torched during
anti-Serb riots in 2004. They worried
about their future in an independent
Kosovo. They were grateful for recent
efforts by the government to be more
inclusive and to offer jobs to ethnic
Serbs. That was the kind of grassroots
reconciliation that we wanted to
promote. Kosovo’s impressive female
Muslim President, Atifete Jahjaga, was
our ally in pushing for change and
reconciliation inside her country. As
Cathy put it, this diplomacy was not just
about normalizing relations between
countries; it was about “normalizing life
so that the people who live in the north
can go about their daily lives feeling
part of a community.”
In April 2013, thanks to Cathy’s
continued hard work building on the
foundation we had laid together,
Kosovo’s Prime Minister Thaçi and
Serbia’s Prime Minister Ivica Dačić
reached a landmark agreement to resolve
the disputes along their border, move
toward normalization, and open the door
to EU membership. Kosovo agreed to
give more autonomy to local Serbian
communities in the north, and Serbia
agreed to pull back its forces. Both sides
pledged not to interfere in the other’s
quest for greater European integration. If
they proceed to implement the
agreements, the people of Kosovo and
Serbia finally have a chance to build the
peaceful, prosperous future they
deserve.

My final trip as Secretary of State in
December 2012 brought me again to
Northern Ireland, a place where people
have worked hard and suffered much to
leave their past conflicts behind. They
would be the first to tell you, from both
sides of their Catholic-Protestant
sectarian divide, that their work is far
from over and that their biggest
challenge is stimulating enough
economic activity to create inclusive
prosperity that benefits each community.
Still, at a luncheon in Belfast, happily
surrounded by old friends and
acquaintances, we reminisced about how
far we’d come together.
When Bill was first elected President,
the Troubles in Northern Ireland had
been raging for decades. Most
Protestants wanted to remain part of the
United Kingdom, while most Catholics
wanted to join with the Republic of
Ireland to the south, and long years of
violence had left both sides embittered
and dug in. Northern Ireland was an
island within an island. Street by street,
the old touchstones of identity loomed
large—which church a family went to,
which school the children attended,
which soccer jersey they wore, which
street they walked down, at which hour
of the day, with which friends.
Everybody noticed everything. And that
was on a normal day.
In 1995, Bill appointed former
Senator George Mitchell as Special
Envoy for Northern Ireland. Bill became
the first U.S. President to visit Northern
Ireland when he and I traveled to Belfast
later that year, and turned on the lights of
Belfast’s Christmas tree in front of a
vast crowd.
I returned to Northern Ireland nearly
every year for the rest of the decade and
stayed actively involved as a Senator in
the years that followed. In 1998 I helped
organize the Vital Voices Conference of
women in Belfast who were pressing for
a peace agreement. Their whispers of
“Enough!” had become a rallying cry
that could no longer be ignored. As I
spoke from the podium, I looked up and
saw Gerry Adams, Martin McGuinness,
and other leaders of Sinn Féin, the
political wing of the Irish Republican
Army, sitting in the front row of the
balcony. Behind them I saw leading
Unionists who refused to talk with Sinn
Féin. The fact that they were both there
—at a women’s conference for peace—
exemplified their openness to
compromise.
The Good Friday Agreement, which
was signed that year and put Northern
Ireland on the path toward peace, was a
triumph of diplomacy, especially for
Bill and George Mitchell, who did so
much to bring the parties together. Most
of all, though, it was a testament to the
courage of the people of Northern
Ireland. It felt like one of those moments
when “hope and history rhyme,” in the
words of the great Irish poet Seamus
Heaney. Implementation would be
bumpy, but peace began to bring
benefits. Unemployment fell, home
values rose, and the number of American
companies investing in Northern Ireland
increased.
By the time I returned as Secretary of
State in 2009, the global financial crisis
had taken a heavy toll on the celebrated
“Celtic Tiger.” Roadblocks and barbed
wire were gone from the streets, but the
process of disarmament and
“devolution,” which was supposed to
grant increasing autonomy to Northern
Ireland, was in danger of stalling. Many
Catholics and Protestants still lived
segregated lives, in separate
neighborhoods, some still divided by
actual walls—which had the Orwellian
name “peace walls.”
In March 2009, two British soldiers
were killed in County Antrim and a
policeman was killed in County Armagh.
Rather than sparking violence, the
murders had the opposite effect.
Catholics and Protestants marched
together in vigils, attended interfaith
services, and declared with one voice
their refusal to go back to the old ways.
The killings could have been the start of
a backward slide. Instead they proved
how far Northern Ireland had come. On
a visit in October 2009 and in frequent
phone calls to Northern Ireland’s First
Minister Peter Robinson, Deputy First
Minister Martin McGuinness, and other
leaders, I urged them to continue
disarmament by paramilitary groups and
take the final steps of devolution,
especially on putting the vital areas of
policing and justice under the control of
the Northern Irish government.
Addressing a full session of the
Northern Ireland Assembly, I reminded
them, “There have been many moments
in Northern Ireland’s peace journey
when progress seemed difficult, when
every route forward was blocked, and
there seemed to be nowhere to go. But
you have always found a way to do what
you believed was right for the people of
Northern Ireland.” Because of this
perseverance, “Northern Ireland stands
as an example to the world of how even
the staunchest adversaries can overcome
differences to work together for the
common and greater good. So I
encourage you to move forward now
with that same spirit of unstoppable grit
and resolve. And I pledge that the United
States will be behind you all the way, as
you work toward peace and stability that
lasts.”
Just weeks after my visit, a car bomb
seriously injured another policeman, and
it again seemed as if the carefully
stitched fabric of peace might unravel.
But once again it held. In February 2010,
the parties reached a new deal on
policing powers, called the
Hillsborough Agreement. Progress
toward a lasting peace was back on
track, despite the best efforts of
extremists on both sides to derail the
process. In June 2012, we saw the most
remarkable sign of change yet: Queen
Elizabeth visited Northern Ireland and
shook hands with Martin McGuinness. It
was a gesture that would have been
unimaginable just a few years before.
In December 2012, seventeen years
since my first visit to Belfast, I was back
there and I ran into an old friend, Sharon
Haughey. In 1995, when she was just
fourteen years old, she sent Bill a deeply
moving letter about the future she
dreamed of for herself and for Northern
Ireland. He read an excerpt at the
Christmas tree lighting in Belfast. “Both
sides have been hurt. Both sides will
have to forgive,” she wrote. When
Sharon got a little older, she worked as
an intern in my Senate office, helping
serve New York, with its large and
proud Irish American community. She
learned a lot in Washington, and when
she went home she ran for office and
was elected Lord Mayor of Armagh.
When she showed up at that lunch in
2012, she was wearing her ceremonial
chain of office and told me she had plans
to be married later that month. I thought
about the family Sharon would start and
about all the children growing up in
Northern Ireland after the Good Friday
Agreement. They had a chance at lives
uncolored by the pain of the Troubles. I
hoped they would never turn back and
that their peace and progress would be
an inspiration for the rest of Europe and
the world.
11

Russia: Reset and
Regression

Hard men present hard choices—none
more so than Vladimir Putin, the
President of Russia. Putin’s worldview
is shaped by his admiration for the
powerful czars of Russian history,
Russia’s long-standing interest in
controlling the nations on its borders,
and his personal determination that his
country never again appear weak or at
the mercy of the West, as he believes it
was after the collapse of the Soviet
Union. He wants to reassert Russia’s
power by dominating its neighbors and
controlling their access to energy. He
also wants to play a larger role in the
Middle East to increase Moscow’s
influence in that region and reduce the
threat from restive Muslims within and
beyond Russia’s southern borders. To
achieve these goals, he seeks to reduce
the influence of the United States in
Central and Eastern Europe and other
areas that he considers part of Russia’s
sphere, and to counter or at least mute
our efforts in the countries roiled by the
Arab Spring.
All of that helps explain why Putin
first pressured Ukrainian President
Viktor Yanukovych to walk away from
closer ties with the European Union in
late 2013, and why, after Yanukovych’s
government disintegrated, Putin invaded
and annexed Crimea. If Putin is
restrained and doesn’t push beyond
Crimea into eastern Ukraine, it will not
be because he has lost his appetite for
more power, territory, and influence.
Putin sees geopolitics as a zero-sum
game in which, if someone is winning,
then someone else has to be losing.
That’s an outdated but still dangerous
concept, one that requires the United
States to show both strength and
patience. To manage our relationship
with the Russians, we should work with
them on specific issues when possible,
and rally other nations to work with us
to prevent or limit their negative
behavior when needed. That’s a difficult
but essential balance to strike, as I found
over my four years as Secretary.

Winston Churchill observed, “In a true
unity of Europe, Russia must have her
part,” and in 1991, when the Soviet
Union collapsed, there was great hope
that it would happen. I remember the
thrill of watching Boris Yeltsin standing
on a tank in Moscow as he turned back a
coup by old Soviet hard-liners that
threatened Russia’s new democracy.
Yeltsin was willing to quit pointing
nuclear weapons toward American
cities, destroy fifty tons of plutonium,
and sign a cooperation pact with NATO.
But he faced stiff opposition to his
policies at home from those who wanted
to keep their distance from Europe and
the United States, keep as much control
over their neighbors as possible, and
keep the unruly force of Russian
democracy at bay.
After Yeltsin underwent heart surgery
in 1996, he never regained the energy
and powers of concentration required to
manage the unruly Russian political
system. He unexpectedly retired on New
Year’s Eve in 1999, six months before
his term expired, clearing the way for
his chosen successor, a little-known
former KGB officer from St. Petersburg
named Vladimir Putin.
Most people assumed that Putin was
chosen because he would be loyal,
protecting Yeltsin and his family, and
because he would govern more
vigorously than Yeltsin had. He was
disciplined and fit, a practitioner of
judo, and he inspired hope and
confidence among Russians still reeling
from so much political change and
economic adversity. But he also proved
over time to be thin-skinned and
autocratic, resenting criticism and
eventually cracking down on dissent and
debate, including from a free press and
NGOs.
In June 2001, when President Bush
met Putin for the first time, he famously
said, “I was able to get a sense of his
soul.” The two leaders made common
cause in the “Global War on Terror,” as
Putin found it useful to align his brutal
campaign in the restive Muslim-majority
republic of Chechnya with America’s
fight against al Qaeda. But it didn’t take
long for relations to sour. The Iraq War,
Putin’s increasingly authoritarian
behavior at home, and Russia’s invasion
of Georgia in August 2008 increased
tension.
As Russia’s economy grew, driven by
oil and gas revenues, Putin allowed the
wealth to concentrate in the hands of
politically connected oligarchs rather
than investing broadly in the talents of
the Russian people and the country’s
infrastructure. He pursued an aggressive
vision of a “Greater Russia” that
unnerved his neighbors and conjured up
bad memories of Soviet expansionism.
And he used Russia’s natural gas exports
to intimidate Ukrainians and others in
January 2006 and again in January 2009
by cutting off supplies and raising
prices.
Among the most egregious
developments in the new Russia were
the attacks on the press. Newspapers,
television stations, and bloggers faced
intense pressure to toe the Kremlin line.
Since 2000, Russia has been the fourth
most dangerous place in the world to be
a journalist—not as bad as Iraq but
worse than Somalia or Pakistan.
Between 2000 and 2009 nearly twenty
journalists were killed in Russia, and in
only one case was the killer convicted.
When I visited Moscow in October
2009, I thought it important to speak out
in support of press freedoms and against
the official campaign of intimidation. At
a reception at Spaso House, the stately
home of American Ambassadors to
Russia since 1933, I met with
journalists, lawyers, and other civil
society leaders, including one activist
who told me that he had been badly
beaten by unidentified thugs. These
Russians had seen friends and
colleagues harassed, intimidated, even
killed, yet they went on working,
writing, and speaking, refusing to be
silenced. I assured them that the United
States would publicly and privately
raise human rights concerns with the
Russian government.
Where you say something can be as
important as what you say. I could talk
with activists in Spaso House all I
wanted, but most Russians would never
hear my words. So I asked the embassy
if they could find an independent
broadcaster who would host me. One
possibility, a radio station called Ekho
Moskvy, or “Echo of Moscow,” sounded
more like an awkwardly named
propaganda outlet than a bastion of a
free press. But our diplomats on the
ground assured me that the station was
one of the most independent, fairminded, and hard-hitting in Russia.
In my live interview, I was asked
about some of the pressing issues in the
U.S.-Russia relationship, including
Georgia and Iran, and then we turned to
the question of human rights inside
Russia. “I have no doubt in my mind that
democracy is in Russia’s best interests,”
I said, “and that respecting human rights,
an independent judiciary, a free media
are in the interests of building a strong,
stable political system that provides a
platform for broadly shared prosperity.
We will continue to say that and we will
continue to support those who also stand
for those values.” We talked about the
imprisonment, beatings, and killings of
journalists. “I think people want their
government to stand up and say this is
wrong, and they’re going to try to
prevent it and they’re going to make sure
the people are brought to justice who are
engaged in such behavior,” I said. The
station remains on the air and continues
to maintain its independence.
Unfortunately, during the crackdown on
dissent surrounding the invasion of
Crimea in 2014, the radio station’s
website was temporarily blocked. It
appears the Kremlin is moving to further
stamp out all dissenting voices.
After eight years as President, Putin
faced constitutionally mandated term
limits, leading him in 2008 to swap jobs
with his Prime Minister, Dmitry
Medvedev. At first the switch seemed
like a farce, a way for Putin to keep a
hold on power from a different perch,
and there was certainly an element of
that. But Medvedev surprised many by
bringing a new tone to the Kremlin. He
seemed more open to dissenting views at
home, more conciliatory abroad, and
more interested in diversifying Russia’s
economy beyond oil, gas, and other
commodities.
I came into office skeptical of
Russia’s leadership duet but hopeful that
we could find areas where we could
work together. As a Senator I had been a
frequent critic of Putin’s rule, but I knew
it was counterproductive for us to see
Russia only as a threat when there were
issues we needed to pursue with them.
The question of nations working
together on some issues while clashing
on others is part of a classic debate
within foreign policy circles. Should the
United States stop negotiating on arms
control or trade because we objected to
Russia’s aggression in Georgia? Or
should issues proceed on parallel
tracks? Straight up transactional
diplomacy isn’t always pretty, but often
it’s necessary.
In 2009, President Obama and I
thought we could achieve key U.S.
national interests with Russia through an
approach with three elements: finding
specific areas for cooperation where our
interests aligned, standing firm where
our interests diverged, and engaging
consistently with the Russian people
themselves. This approach became
known as “the reset.”
As we formulated this approach at
State, Bill Burns, who had served three
years as U.S. Ambassador to Russia, led
our planning, offering insights into the
opaque machinations of the Kremlin’s
personalities. Medvedev was a young
leader who had come to power without
excessive Cold War baggage. Putin, by
contrast, had cut his teeth in the KGB in
the 1970s and 1980s, the ultimate Cold
War résumé. In my view, despite the
office shuffle, Putin remained a
formidable power who would make
attempts at expanding cooperation more
difficult. If there were opportunities to
do so—and I thought there were—it
would be because both sides made a
clear-eyed assessment of shared
interests.
My first meeting with Russian Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov was in March
2009. Richard Holbrooke, who had
known him when they both served as
Ambassadors at the UN in the late
1990s, told me Lavrov was the
consummate diplomat, serving his
masters in Moscow with intellect,
energy, and no small amount of
arrogance. (Coming from Richard, that
was really saying something!) Lavrov,
perpetually tanned and well-tailored,
spoke fluent English and had a taste for
fine whiskey and the poetry of Pushkin.
He had a turbulent relationship with my
predecessor, Condoleezza Rice,
especially (and for good reason) after
Russia invaded Georgia. Those tensions
had not disappeared, but if we wanted
progress on nuclear arms control,
sanctions on Iran, or access to
Afghanistan’s northern border, we
needed to cooperate. Perhaps a joke
could break the ice.
In politics a sense of humor is
essential. There are countless reasons
why you have to be able to laugh at
yourself. How many times, as Senator
from New York, did I go on David
Letterman’s show to deliver a pantsuit
joke? (The answer is three.) During the
2008 campaign I made a surprise
appearance on Saturday Night Live
alongside Amy Poehler, who had
perfected a hilarious “Hillary Clinton”
with a memorably boisterous laugh. In
diplomacy, with its carefully scripted
conversations across language and
cultural divides, there’s less room for
humor. But occasionally it comes in
handy. This felt like one of those times.
In a speech at the Munich Security
Conference in February, Vice President
Biden had said, “It is time to press the
reset button and to revisit the many areas
where we can and should be working
together with Russia.” I liked the idea of
a “reset”—not as a way of ignoring our
real disagreements but to embed them in
a broader agenda alongside areas of
common interest. Talking it over with
my team in the run-up to meeting Lavrov
in Geneva, Switzerland, we hit on an
idea. Why not present Lavrov with an
actual reset button? It might get people
laughing—including Lavrov—and
ensure that our commitment to a fresh
start, not our disagreements, made the
headlines. A little unconventional,
maybe, but worth a try.
Lavrov and I met in the
InterContinental Hotel’s Salon
Panorama, named for its panoramic
view of Geneva. Before we sat down, I
presented him with a small green box,
complete with a ribbon. While the
cameras snapped away, I opened it and
pulled out a bright red button on a
yellow base that had been pulled off the
whirlpool in the hotel. It was labeled
with the Russian word peregruzka. We
both laughed and pushed the button
together. “We worked hard to get the
right Russian word. Do you think we got
it?” I asked. The Foreign Minister took a
closer look. The other Americans in the
room, especially the Russian-speaking
ones who had chosen the word, held
their breath. “You got it wrong,” he said.
Was this light moment about to become
an international incident? I just kept
laughing. Then so did Lavrov, and
everyone relaxed. “It should be
perezagruzka,” he explained. “This
means overcharged.” “Well,” I
responded, “we won’t let you do that to
us, I promise.”
It was not the finest hour for American
linguistic skills. But if our goal had been
to break the ice and make sure no one
would ever forget the “reset,” then our
translation error had certainly done that.
Lavrov said he would take the button
home and keep it on his desk. Later that
night, Philippe Reines, who had helped
dream up the joke in the first place,
made a last-ditch effort to correct the
spelling error. He approached the
Russian Ambassador to Switzerland,
who was holding the button, and asked
to replace the label. “I don’t think I can
do that until I talk with my minister,” the
cautious Ambassador replied. “Well, if
your minister doesn’t give that back to
us, my minister is going to send me to
Siberia!” Philippe exclaimed. I must
admit, it was a tempting thought.
At President Obama’s first meeting
with Medvedev, in London in April
2009, the American and Russian
delegations faced each other across the
formal dining table at Winfield House,
the residence of our U.S. Ambassador. I
was the only woman on either side of the
table. This was President Obama’s first
overseas trip since taking office, a
strategic swing through Europe to attend
a G-20 meeting, a NATO summit, and
visits to key allies, and I was glad to be
by his side. Our time on the road
together over the years, from that first
visit to London all the way to our
historic final trip to Burma in late 2012,
gave us a chance to consult and
strategize far away from the daily
hubbub of Washington. Before one of
our meetings in Prague, on that same
April trip, he pulled me aside and said,
“Hillary, I need to talk to you.” He put
his arm around me and walked me over
toward a window. I wondered what
sensitive policy matter he wanted to
discuss. Instead he whispered in my ear,
“You’ve got something in your teeth.” It
was embarrassing, to be sure, but also
the kind of thing only a friend would say
and a sign that we were going to have
each other’s backs.
During that first meeting with the
Russians, the two Presidents broached
the idea of a new treaty to cut the number
of nuclear weapons on both sides and
managed to find common ground on
Afghanistan, terrorism, trade, and even
Iran, despite disagreements on missile
defense and Georgia. Medvedev said
that Russia’s experience in Afghanistan
in the 1980s had been “pitiful” and that
they were willing to allow the United
States to transport lethal cargo across
their territory to supply our troops. That
was important because it would give us
leverage with Pakistan, which otherwise
controlled the only route for troops and
equipment into Afghanistan. Medvedev
also acknowledged, to my surprise, that
Russia had underestimated Iran’s
growing nuclear capacity. “Turns out
you were right,” he said. Russia had a
complicated relationship with Iran. It
was selling Tehran weapons and even
helping it build a nuclear power plant,
but the Russians did not want to see
nuclear proliferation or instability on
their already volatile southern flank. As
you’ll read later, Medvedev’s comment
opened a door for stronger cooperation
on Iran and eventually led to a landmark
vote at the UN to impose tough new
sanctions. He did not, however, alter his
opposition to our plans for missile
defense in Europe, despite the fact that,
as we said many times, it was designed
to protect against potential threats from
Iran rather than from Russia.
President Obama emphasized the
positive and promised a quick follow-up
on a new nuclear arms treaty, as well as
deeper cooperation regarding
Afghanistan, terrorism, and Russia’s
entry into the World Trade Organization.
All in all, it was a thorough, candid
discussion of difficult issues—what we
came to expect from Medvedev. The
reset seemed to be on track.
A team of State Department
negotiators, led by Under Secretary
Ellen Tauscher and Assistant Secretary
Rose Gottemoeller, worked for a year
with their Russian counterparts to iron
out every detail of the New Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty, or New
START, which set limits on numbers of
Russian and American nuclear warheads
on missiles and bombers. After
President Obama and Medvedev signed
the treaty in April 2010, I began making
the case to persuade my former Senate
colleagues to ratify it, working closely
with my Assistant Secretary for
Legislative Affairs Rich Verma, a
longtime aide to Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid and an astute student of
Capitol Hill’s often impenetrable ways.
I called key Senate Republicans, who
told me they didn’t trust the Russians and
worried the United States would not be
able to verify compliance. I explained
that the treaty gave us mechanisms to do
just that and if the Russians didn’t live
up to their word, we could always
withdraw. I reminded them that even
President Reagan, with his philosophy of
“trust but verify,” had signed
disarmament agreements with the
Soviets. And I stressed that time was of
the essence; the old START had expired,
so for nearly a year we hadn’t had any
weapons inspectors on the ground in
Russia checking what was happening in
their missile silos. That was a dangerous
lapse we couldn’t let continue.
In the weeks leading up to the vote, I
spoke with eighteen Senators, nearly all
of them Republicans. As Secretary of
State I worked with Congress on many
matters, especially the Department’s
budget, but this was my first experience
twisting arms on behalf of the White
House since leaving the Senate myself. It
was helpful to call on my relationships
with former colleagues built over eight
years of reaching across the aisle to
write legislation and consult on
committees. We also had on our side a
master Senate operator, Vice President
Biden, and the bipartisan tag-team at the
helm of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, Chairman John Kerry of
Massachusetts and Ranking Member
Richard Lugar of Indiana.
We kept getting closer to the twothirds majority of the Senate required
under the Constitution to ratify a treaty,
but the final votes were hard to find. Our
prospects dimmed after the midterm
elections in November 2010, when
Republicans took control of the House,
winning sixty-three more seats, and
narrowed the Democratic majority in the
Senate, picking up six seats. Despite that
setback, Senator Lugar urged me to come
up to the Hill in person to make the final
sale. With the outlook for passage grim,
I kept working the phones and visited the
Capitol again just before Christmas to
make a final appeal. That night the
Senate voted successfully to end debate,
and the next day the treaty passed 71 to
26. It was a victory for bipartisanship,
U.S.-Russia relations, and a safer world.
Over time, President Obama and
President Medvedev developed a
personal relationship that offered further
opportunities for cooperation. At a long
meeting I had with Medvedev outside
Moscow in October 2009, he raised his
plan to build a high-tech corridor in
Russia modeled after our own Silicon
Valley. When I suggested that he visit the
original in California, he turned to his
staff and told them to follow up. He
included a stop there on his 2010 visit to
the United States, and, by all accounts,
was impressed with what he saw. That
could have been the start of realizing
Medvedev’s vision for a diversified
Russian economy—if Putin had
permitted it.
The reset led to a number of early
successes, including imposing strong
sanctions on Iran and North Korea,
opening a northern supply route to equip
our troops in Afghanistan, bringing
Russia into the World Trade
Organization, winning UN backing for
the no-fly zone in Libya, and expanding
counterterrorism cooperation. But the
tone began to shift in late 2011. In
September Medvedev announced that he
would not run for reelection; instead
Putin would reclaim his old job in 2012.
This shuffle confirmed what I had said
four years before: that Medvedev was
just keeping Putin’s chair warm.
Then, in December, Russia’s
Parliamentary elections were marred by
widespread reports of fraud.
Independent political parties were
denied the right to register, and there
were reported attempts to stuff ballot
boxes, manipulate voter lists, and other
blatant irregularities. Independent
Russian election observers were
harassed, and their websites faced cyber
attacks. At an international conference in
Lithuania, I expressed serious concerns
about these reports. “The Russian
people, like people everywhere, deserve
the right to have their voices heard and
their votes counted,” I said, “and that
means they deserve fair, free,
transparent elections and leaders who
are accountable to them.” Tens of
thousands of Russian citizens reached
the same conclusion and took to the
streets to protest. When chants of “Putin
is a thief” filled the air, Putin lashed out
—directly at me. “She set the tone for
some actors in our country and gave
them a signal,” he claimed. If only I had
such power! The next time I saw
President Putin, I chided him about his
remarks: “I can just see people in
Moscow waking up and saying Hillary
Clinton wants us to go demonstrate.
That’s not how it works, Mr. President.”
Still, if I had helped even a few people
find the courage to speak out for real
democracy, then it was all to the good.
In May 2012, Putin formally
reclaimed the title of President and
shortly afterward declined President
Obama’s invitation to a G-8 summit at
Camp David. A cool wind was blowing
from the east. In June, I sent a memo to
President Obama outlining my views. He
was no longer dealing with Medvedev
and needed to be ready to take a harder
line. Putin was “deeply resentful of the
U.S. and suspicious of our actions,” I
argued, and intent on reclaiming lost
Russian influence in its neighborhood,
from Eastern Europe to Central Asia. He
might call his project “regional
integration,” but that was code for
rebuilding a lost empire. I was with
President Obama when he sat down with
Putin for the first time as two heads of
state on the sidelines of a G-20 meeting
in Los Cabos, Mexico. “Bargain hard,” I
advised, because Putin will “give no
gifts.”
Russia soon took a less constructive
approach on many key issues, especially
the conflict in Syria, where it propped
up the Assad regime in its brutal war
and blocked all attempts at the United
Nations to organize a strong
international response. The Kremlin
cracked down hard on dissidents,
NGOs, and LGBT citizens at home and
went back to bullying its neighbors.
For those who expected the reset to
open a new era of goodwill between
Russia and the United States, it proved
to be a bitter disappointment. For those
of us who had more modest expectations
—that de-linking tough issues and toning
down rhetoric on both sides could create
space for progress on specific priorities
—the reset delivered. Later, after the
invasion of Crimea in 2014, some in
Congress blamed the reset for
emboldening Putin. I think this view
misunderstands both Putin and the reset.
After all, he had invaded Georgia in
2008 and faced few consequences, from
the United States or others. Putin
invaded Georgia and Crimea for his own
reasons, on his own timetable, in
response to events on the ground.
Neither the Bush Administration’s tough
rhetoric and doctrine of preemptive war
nor the Obama Administration’s focus
on pragmatic cooperation on core
interests deterred or invited these acts of
aggression. The reset was not a reward;
it was a recognition that America has
many important strategic and security
interests, and we need to make progress
where we can. That remains true today.

To understand the complexities of our
relationship with Russia during the reset
and what we were trying to achieve,
consider just one example: Central Asia
and the challenge of supplying our
troops in Afghanistan.
In the aftermath of 9/11, as the United
States prepared to invade Afghanistan,
the Bush Administration leased former
Soviet air bases in two remote but
strategically located Central Asian
countries, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan.
They were used to fly soldiers and
supplies into the Afghan theater. Given
the extraordinary international dynamics
at the time, Russia did not object,
despite the fact that it viewed these
underdeveloped former Soviet republics
as within its sphere of influence. But
soon the Kremlin was encouraging the
Uzbek and Kyrgyz governments to make
sure the Americans did not stay
permanently. For Putin, Central Asia
was Russia’s backyard. He was wary of
both growing Chinese economic
influence and an American military
presence.
By 2009, President Obama was in the
early stages of planning a troop surge
into Afghanistan, to be followed by a
phased withdrawal beginning in 2011.
That meant the U.S. military once again
needed to move large amounts of troops
and matériel into and out of the
mountainous, landlocked country. The
most direct supply line into Afghanistan
was through Pakistan, but this route was
vulnerable to attacks by Taliban
insurgents and temper tantrums by
Pakistani officials. Pentagon planners
wanted a second land route, even if it
was longer and more expensive, to
ensure that our troops were never cut
off. The natural place to look was
Central Asia. Cargo could be off-loaded
at ports in the Baltic Sea and then
shipped thousands of miles by rail
through Russia, to Kazakhstan and
Uzbekistan, and finally across
Afghanistan’s northern border.
Meanwhile troops could be flown in
through the still-open air base in
Kyrgyzstan. The Northern Distribution
Network, as it came to be known, would
provide lavish revenues to corrupt
regimes, but it would also significantly
aid the war effort. It was one of those
classic compromises of foreign policy.
But before it could get going, we had to
get Russia to agree to let us transport
military equipment across its territory.
In President Obama’s first meeting
with Medvedev, he emphasized that, as
part of the reset, the Northern
Distribution Network would be a top
priority for us. In response, Medvedev
said that Russia was open to cooperating
(and profiting from the transit fees). In
July 2009, when President Obama
visited Moscow, an agreement was
formally signed to allow the transport of
lethal military equipment through Russia
to Afghanistan.
Medvedev’s agreement on lethal
transit masked another agenda, however.
For the Kremlin, influence in Central
Asia was still turf to be guarded,
jealously. So even as Russia allowed
U.S. cargo to move through its territory,
it worked to expand its own military
footprint across Central Asia, using our
presence as its excuse to increase
control over the region’s regimes and
undermine their growing ties with
Washington. It was like a modern-day
version of the “Great Game,” the
elaborate 19th-century diplomatic
contest between Russia and Britain for
supremacy in Central Asia—except that
America had a narrowly focused interest
in the region and was not seeking
dominance.
In early December 2010, I traveled to
Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan,
meeting with leaders to keep things on
track. In a town hall meeting with
students and journalists in Bishkek, I
answered questions about relations with
Moscow. “Where does Kyrgyzstan come
in your reset with Russia?” one young
man asked. I explained that while our
countries disagreed on many topics—I
mentioned Georgia and human rights in
particular—our goal was to work
together on a positive agenda and
overcome a long legacy of mistrust.
One of the journalists followed up
with a question about whether the reset
would come at the cost of Kyrgyzstan
and Central Asia: “Is there any rivalry
going on between Russia and the U.S., I
mean, in the region, particularly in
Kyrgyzstan?” I replied that we were
trying to avoid such a scenario and that
the goal of the reset was to reduce
tensions between Washington and
Moscow, which should help countries
like Kyrgyzstan that sometimes feel
trapped in the middle. But, I added, it
was true that Kyrgyzstan was a fledgling
democracy in a region of autocracies.
Democracy was in retreat in Russia. It
was nonexistent in China, the other big
player in the region. So this was not
going to be easy. “I think it’s important
for you to have relations with many, but
not be dependent on any,” I said. “Try to
balance off all the different relations you
have, and get the best help you can.”
When Putin was preparing to take
back the presidency in Moscow, he
published an essay in the fall of 2011 in
a Russian newspaper announcing plans
to regain lost influence among former
Soviet republics and create “a powerful
supra-national union capable of
becoming a pole in the modern world.”
Putin said that this new Eurasian Union
would “change the geopolitical and geoeconomic configuration of the entire
continent.” Some dismissed these words
as campaign bluster, but I thought they
revealed Putin’s true agenda, which was
effectively to “re-Sovietize” Russia’s
periphery. An expanded customs union
would be just the first step.
Putin’s ambitions weren’t limited to
Central Asia. In Europe he used every
bit of leverage he had to keep former
Soviet republics from building ties to the
West, including cutting off gas to
Ukraine, banning imports of Moldovan
wine, and boycotting Lithuanian dairy
products. His acquisitive gaze extended
north, to the Arctic Circle, where
melting ice was opening up new trade
routes and opportunities for oil and gas
exploration. In a symbolic move in
2007, a Russian submarine deposited a
Russian flag on the floor of the ocean
near the North Pole. More ominously,
Putin was reopening old Soviet military
bases across the Arctic.
President Obama and I discussed
Putin’s threats and how to counter them.
I also made a point of traveling to
countries that felt threatened. In Georgia,
which I visited twice, I called on Russia
to end its “occupation,” a word that
caused some consternation in Moscow,
and withdraw from the territories it had
seized in 2008.
For many Americans, the crisis in
Ukraine and the Russian invasion of
Crimea in early 2014 was a wake-up
call. A part of the world that many had
not thought much about since the end of
the Cold War was suddenly back on the
radar. But far from being a surprise, the
Ukrainian crisis was in fact the latest
reminder of Putin’s long-standing aims.
With these ambitions in mind, the Obama
Administration and our European allies
had quietly begun working for years to
reduce Putin’s leverage and counter his
machinations.
On January 1, 2009, Gazprom,
Russia’s powerful state-owned energy
conglomerate, halted natural gas exports
to Ukraine. That, in turn, restricted
energy flowing to part of Europe. Eleven
people froze to death in the first ten
days, ten of them in Poland, where
temperatures fell below –10 degrees
Fahrenheit. It wasn’t the first time this
had happened. In fact it had happened
exactly three years earlier, in the middle
of another cold winter.
Ukraine, which has a sizable ethnic
Russian and Russian-speaking minority,
has had a close but conflicted
relationship with Moscow for centuries.
The Orange Revolution, following
disputed Ukrainian elections in 2004,
brought a pro-Western government to
power that sought closer ties with the
European Union, angering Putin. Shutting
off the gas in 2006 was his way of
sending a not-so-subtle message to the
independent-minded leaders in Kyiv. In
2009, he was trying to jack up the prices
for Russian energy and remind everyone
of his power. The move sent a chill
across Europe. Much of the continent
relied on Russian gas; if Ukraine could
be cut off, so could anyone. After
nineteen days a new agreement was
signed, and gas began to flow again into
Ukraine by the time of President
Obama’s inauguration.
In my confirmation testimony before
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
that same January, in the middle of the
crisis, I talked about the importance of
strengthening NATO and the
transatlantic alliance and emphasized my
intention to give energy security “a much
higher priority in our diplomacy.” I cited
the problems in Eastern Europe as “only
the most recent example of how energy
vulnerability constrains our foreign
policy options around the world,
limiting effectiveness in some cases and
forcing our hand in others.”
In my first telephone conversation
with Polish Foreign Minister Radosław
Sikorski, a week after taking office, we
discussed the challenge. “We want a
new policy and a new source,” Sikorski
told me. He favored a pipeline through
the Balkans and Turkey that could give
Europe access to natural gas holdings in
the Caspian Sea. It had become known
as the Southern Corridor pipeline and
emerged as one of our most important
energy diplomacy initiatives. I appointed
Ambassador Richard Morningstar as my
special envoy to negotiate the necessary
agreements to get the project going. This
was complicated by the fact that
Azerbaijan, the key source country on
the Caspian, had a long-running conflict
with its neighbor Armenia. Morningstar
developed a constructive working
relationship with the President of
Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev, to the point
that I recommended Morningstar be
nominated as our ambassador there. I
twice visited Azerbaijan to encourage
regional peace efforts, promote
democratic reforms, and move the
pipeline forward, including by meeting
industry leaders at the annual Caspian
Oil & Gas Show in Baku in 2012. As I
left the State Department, deals were
falling into place and construction is
expected to begin in 2015 with the goal
of getting gas flowing by 2019.
When I met with EU leaders in March
2009, I urged them to elevate energy as
an urgent priority for action. I later
worked with the EU’s Cathy Ashton to
create the U.S.-EU Energy Council.
Teams of U.S. energy experts fanned out
across Europe to help countries explore
alternatives to Russian gas. When I
visited Poland in July 2010, Foreign
Minister Sikorski and I announced
Polish-American cooperation on a
global shale gas initiative to capitalize
on new extraction technologies in a safe,
environmentally sustainable manner.
Exploration has now started there.
America’s own expanding natural gas
supplies helped loosen Russia’s grip on
Europe’s electricity—not because we
started exporting lots of gas, but because
we no longer need to import it
ourselves. Gas once destined for the
United States started finding its way to
Europe. Consumers there got cheaper
gas, and Gazprom was forced to
compete, no longer dictating supply and
demand.
These efforts may not have made big
news back home, but they were not lost
on Putin. By 2013, when Ukraine was
negotiating for closer trade ties with the
EU, he must have felt Russia’s influence
slipping. Putin threatened to increase gas
prices if the deal went through.
Ukraine’s debt to Russia was already
more than $3 billion, and the country’s
finances were in shambles. In
November, Ukraine’s President
Yanukovych abruptly walked away from
the nearly completed EU agreement and
soon accepted a $15 billion bailout
package from the Kremlin.
Many Ukrainians, especially those
living in the capital, Kyiv, and the nonRussian-speaking sections of the
country, were inflamed by the aboutface. They dreamed of living in a
prosperous European democracy, and
now they faced the prospect of coming
once again under Moscow’s thumb.
Massive protests broke out and
intensified when the government fired on
demonstrators. Under pressure,
Yanukovych agreed to constitutional
reforms and new elections. A deal was
brokered between the government and
opposition leaders through the mediation
of diplomats from Poland, France, and
Germany. (The Russians participated in
the talks but then refused to sign the
agreement.) The crowds in the streets,
however, rejected the compromise and
demanded Yanukovych’s resignation.
Surprisingly he then abandoned his
palace and fled Kyiv for the east,
ultimately ending up in Russia. In
response the Ukrainian Parliament asked
opposition leaders to form a new
government.
All this unsettled Moscow. Under the
guise of protecting Russian citizens and
Ukrainians of Russian descent from what
he said was anarchy and violence in
Ukraine, Putin sent Russian troops to
occupy the Black Sea peninsula of
Crimea, which had been part of Russia
until the 1950s and was still home to
many ethnic Russians and major Russian
naval installations. Despite warnings
from President Obama and European
leaders, the Kremlin engineered a rump
referendum for secession in Crimea that
was largely boycotted by the nonRussian-speaking citizens. The UN
General Assembly condemned the
referendum in late March by an
overwhelming margin.
As of this writing, Ukraine’s future is
in jeopardy. The whole world will be
watching to see how this plays out,
especially other former Soviet states and
satellites fearful for their own
independence. All our work since 2009
to reinvigorate NATO, restore strained
transatlantic relations, and reduce
Europe’s dependence on Russian energy
has put us in a stronger position to meet
this challenge, though Putin has many
cards to play, too. And we have to keep
working at it.

I spent time over the years thinking about
ways to understand Putin.
On a visit to his dacha outside of
Moscow in March 2010, we engaged in
a contentious debate about trade and the
World Trade Organization that kept
going in circles. Putin wasn’t giving an
inch. He was hardly even listening. In
exasperation, I tried a different tack. I
knew that one of his personal passions is
wildlife conservation, which I also care
about deeply. So out of the blue, I said,
“Prime Minister Putin, tell me about
what you’re doing to save the tigers in
Siberia.” He looked up in surprise. Now
I had his attention.
Putin stood and asked me to follow
him. Leaving our aides behind, he led
me down a long corridor to his private
office. We surprised a number of beefy
security guards who had been lounging
about. They jumped to attention as we
passed. Behind an armored door, we
reached his desk and a nearby wall
containing a large map of Russia. He
launched into an animated discourse in
English on the fate of the tigers in the
east, polar bears in the north, and other
endangered species. It was fascinating to
see the change in his engagement and
bearing. He asked me if my husband
wanted to go with him in a few weeks to
tag polar bears on Franz Josef Land. I
told him I’d ask, and that if he couldn’t
go, I’d check my schedule. Putin raised
an eyebrow in response. (As it turned
out, neither of us went.)
Another memorably unscripted
conversation with Putin occurred in
September 2012 at the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation meeting he
hosted in Vladivostok. President Obama
couldn’t attend because of his campaign
schedule, so I represented him. Putin and
Lavrov resented the President’s absence
and my strong criticism of Russia’s
support for Bashar al-Assad in Syria.
They would not agree to a meeting
between Putin and me until fifteen
minutes before the dinner started. But, in
accordance with protocol, the
representative of the United States, as
the former host of APEC, would be
seated next to that year’s host, which
meant Putin and I would sit together.
We discussed his challenges, from
Russia’s long border with China in the
east to the restive Muslim states inside
Russia and across its borders. I told
Putin about my recent visit in St.
Petersburg to a memorial for the victims
of the Nazis’ siege of the city (then
called Leningrad), which lasted from
1941 to 1944 and killed more than
600,000 people. That struck a chord
with the history-conscious Russian
leader. He launched into a story about
his parents that I had never heard or read
about. During the war Putin’s father
came home from the front lines for a
short break. When he approached the
apartment where he lived with his wife,
he saw a pile of bodies stacked in the
street and men loading them into a
waiting flatbed truck. As he drew
nearer, he saw a woman’s legs wearing
shoes that he recognized as his wife’s.
He ran up and demanded his wife’s
body. After an argument the men gave in,
and Putin’s father took his wife in his
arms and, after examining her, realized
she was still alive. He carried her up to
their apartment and nursed her back to
health. Eight years later, in 1952, their
son Vladimir was born.
When I reported this story to our U.S.
Ambassador to Russia Mike McFaul, a
prominent Russia expert, he said he too
had never heard it before. Obviously I
have no way to verify Putin’s story, but
I’ve thought of it often. For me, it sheds
some light on the man he has become and
the country he governs. He’s always
testing you, always pushing the
boundaries.
In January 2013, as I prepared to
leave the State Department, I wrote
President Obama a final memo about
Russia and what he might expect from
Putin in the second term. It had been four
years since the reset first allowed us to
make progress on nuclear arms control,
Iranian sanctions, Afghanistan, and other
key interests. I still believed it was in
America’s long-term national interest to
have a constructive working relationship
with Russia, if possible. But we had to
be realistic about Putin’s intentions and
the danger he represented to his
neighbors and the global order, and
design our policy accordingly. In stark
terms, I advised the President that
difficult days lay ahead and that our
relationship with Moscow would likely
get worse before it got better. Medvedev
may have cared about improving
relations with the West, but Putin was
under the mistaken impression that we
needed Russia more than Russia needed
us. He viewed the United States
primarily as a competitor. And he was
running scared because of his own
resurgent domestic opposition and the
collapse of autocracies in the Middle
East and elsewhere. This was not a
recipe for a positive relationship.
With all this in mind, I suggested we
set a new course. The reset had allowed
us to pick off the low-hanging fruit in
terms of bilateral cooperation. And there
was no need to blow up our
collaboration on Iran or Afghanistan. But
we should hit the pause button on new
efforts. Don’t appear too eager to work
together. Don’t flatter Putin with highlevel attention. Decline his invitation for
a Presidential-level summit in Moscow
in September. And make clear that
Russian intransigence wouldn’t stop us
from pursuing our interests and policies
regarding Europe, Central Asia, Syria
and other hotspots. Strength and resolve
were the only language Putin would
understand. We should send him a
message that his actions have
consequences while reassuring our
allies that the United States will stand up
for them.
Not everyone at the White House
agreed with my relatively harsh analysis.
The President accepted Putin’s
invitation for a bilateral summit in the
fall. But over the summer it became
harder to ignore the negative trajectory,
especially with Edward Snowden, the
contractor who leaked National Security
Agency secrets to journalists, given
asylum by Putin in Russia. President
Obama canceled the Moscow summit
and began taking a harder line with
Putin. By 2014, and the Ukrainian crisis,
relations had plummeted.
Beyond Crimea and other
international consequences of Putin’s
rule, Russia itself has become a study in
squandered potential. Talented people
and money are leaving. It doesn’t have to
be this way. Russia is blessed not just
with vast natural resources but also a
well-educated workforce. As I’ve
discussed with Putin, Medvedev, and
Lavrov over the years, Russia could be
charting a peaceful and profitable future
as part of Europe rather than as its
antagonist. Think of the more expansive
trade deals Russia could negotiate with
a different attitude. Instead of
intimidating Ukraine and other
neighbors, it could be engaged in greater
scientific cooperation with EU and U.S.
partners, expanding innovation and
developing advanced technologies,
trying to build its own high-tech worldclass business center, as Medvedev
envisioned. Think also of the long-term
strategic interests Russia could pursue if
Putin weren’t fixated on reclaiming the
Soviet Empire and crushing domestic
dissent. He might realize that Russia’s
hand in dealing with extremists along its
southern border, as well as with China
in the east, would be strengthened by
closer ties with Europe and the United
States. He might see Ukraine as it wants
to be seen—as a bridge between Europe
and Russia that would increase
prosperity and security for all of them.
Unfortunately, as of now, Russia under
Putin remains frozen between the past
they can’t let go of and the future they
can’t bring themselves to embrace.
12

Latin America:
Democrats and
Demagogues

Here’s a question whose answer may
surprise you: What part of the world is
the destination for more than 40 percent
of all U.S. exports? It’s not China, which
accounts for just 7 percent. It’s not the
European Union, at 21 percent. It’s the
Americas. In fact the two largest single
destinations for our exports are our
closest neighbors: Canada and Mexico.
If that’s news to you, you’re not alone.
Many of us in the United States have an
outdated picture of what’s happening in
our hemisphere. We still think of Latin
America as a land of coups and crime
rather than a region where free markets
and free people are thriving, as a source
of migrants and drugs rather than a
destination for trade and investment.
Our southern neighbors have made
remarkable economic and political
progress over the past twenty years.
Latin America is a region with thirty-six
countries and territories (nearly all of
them democracies), with about 600
million people, rapidly expanding
middle classes, abundant energy
supplies, and a combined GDP of more
than $5 trillion.
Because of our proximity, the
economies of the United States and our
neighbors have long been deeply
entwined. Supply chains crisscross the
region; so do family, social, and cultural
networks. Some see those close ties as a
threat to sovereignty or identity, but I see
our interdependence as a comparative
advantage to be embraced, especially at
a time when we need to spur more
growth at home. There’s a lot we can
learn from the story of Latin America’s
transformation and what it means for the
United States and the world, especially
if we are going to make the most of this
“power of proximity” in the years ahead.

Many of our current misconceptions
about Latin America have their roots in a
century of difficult history. Latin
America was a battleground of the
ideological competition between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Cuba was the most prominent example
of a Cold War flash point, but proxy
battles raged in one form or another up
and down the hemisphere.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and
the end of the Cold War helped usher in
a new era for the region. Long and brutal
civil wars wound down. Elections
brought new democratic governments to
power. Economic growth began lifting
people out of poverty. In 1994 my
husband invited all the region’s
democracies to the first Summit of the
Americas in Miami, where we all
committed to meet every four years to
continue our economic integration and
political cooperation.
The Summit was just one of many
efforts the Clinton Administration made
to forge a broader partnership with our
neighbors. The United States provided
crucial assistance to Mexico and Brazil
during their financial crises. With
bipartisan backing in Congress, we
developed and funded Plan Colombia,
an ambitious campaign to help defend
South America’s oldest democracy from
narcotraffickers and guerrilla groups,
and in Haiti, helped reverse a coup and
restore constitutional democracy. In a
sign of how far the region had come,
many of Latin America’s other
democracies provided troops for the UN
mission in Haiti. According to the Pew
Research Center, approval of the United
States in Latin America reached 63
percent in 2001.
As a Governor of Texas who
supported increasing trade and
immigration reform, President George
W. Bush came in with good standing in
the region. He developed strong
personal relationships with Mexican
President Vicente Fox and his successor,
Felipe Calderón. The Bush
Administration supported and
strengthened Plan Colombia and started
the Mérida Initiative to assist Mexico in
its fight against drug cartels. The
administration’s broader approach to
foreign policy, however, did not win
many friends in the region. Nor did its
tendency to view the hemisphere through
a left vs. right ideological lens that was
a remnant of the Cold War. By 2008 just
24 percent of Mexicans and 23 percent
of Brazilians approved of the United
States. The average across the region,
according to Gallup, was 35 percent.
When the Obama Administration came
into office in early 2009, we knew it
was time for a new start.
President Obama explained our
“equal partnership” approach in a
speech in April 2009 at the Summit of
the Americas in Trinidad and Tobago.
He pledged that there would no longer
be a “senior partner and junior partner in
our relations”; instead the people of
Latin America could expect “engagement
based on mutual respect and common
interests and shared values.” As he often
did, the President reflected on the need
to move beyond “stale debates” and
“false choices,” in this case between
“rigid, state-run economies or unbridled
and unregulated capitalism; between
blame for right-wing paramilitaries or
left-wing insurgents; between sticking to
inflexible policies with regard to Cuba
or denying the full human rights that are
owed to the Cuban people.” On Cuba in
particular he promised a new beginning.
In a first step to modernize a policy that
had “failed to advance liberty or
opportunity for the Cuban people,” the
United States would begin allowing
Cuban Americans to visit the island and
send larger amounts of money back to
their families there. The President also
said he was prepared to engage directly
with the Cuban government on a wide
range of issues, including implementing
democratic reforms and working
together on drug trafficking and
migration challenges, so long as it led to
concrete progress. “I didn’t come here to
debate the past,” he said. “I came here to
deal with the future.”
It was going to be my job, along with
a top-notch group of Latin America
experts at the State Department, to put
the President’s promise into practice. I
decided to begin with a bold gesture to
signal that we were serious about a new
tone in the hemisphere. The place to do
it was Mexico, our closest southern
neighbor, which represented so much of
both the promise and the peril of a
region at a crossroads.

The United States and Mexico share a
border that is nearly two thousand miles
long, and our economies and cultures,
especially in the areas around that
border, are highly integrated. After all,
much of the southwestern United States
was once part of Mexico, and decades
of immigration have only strengthened
the familial and cultural ties between our
nations. My firsthand experience in this
area began in 1972, when the
Democratic National Committee sent me
to register voters in the Rio Grande
Valley of Texas in support of George
McGovern’s campaign for President.
Some people were understandably wary
of a blond girl from Chicago who didn’t
speak a word of Spanish, but soon I was
welcomed into homes and communities
where citizens of Mexican ancestry were
eager to participate fully in our
democracy.
I also made some trips across the
border with my new friends for dinner
and dancing. It was a whole lot easier to
cross back and forth in those days. I
ended up working alongside a guy from
Yale whom I’d been dating named Bill
Clinton. After McGovern lost the
election in a landslide, Bill and I
decided to decompress at a small resort
on the Pacific Coast, and we discovered
that we loved Mexico so much that we
went back often over the years, including
on a honeymoon trip to Acapulco in
1975.
Because of the overheated rhetoric of
our domestic immigration debate, many
Americans still think of Mexico as an
impoverished land that people are
desperate to leave behind when they
head north. But the truth is Mexico’s
economy has thrived in recent years, its
middle class has swelled, and its
democracy has made significant strides.
I was impressed that, to take one
example, under President Felipe
Calderón, Mexico built 140 tuition-free
universities to meet the needs of its
growing economy.
At the start of the Obama
Administration, one of the biggest
hurdles standing in the way of Mexico’s
continued democratic and economic
development was an epidemic of drugrelated violence. Rival cartels battled
one another and the nation’s security
forces, often catching entire communities
in the crossfire. After assuming office in
December 2006, President Calderón had
deployed the army in a major offensive
against the cartels. The violence
escalated, and despite some successes
by the government, the cartels continued
to operate. By the time I became
Secretary of State, drug gangs had
metastasized into paramilitary
organizations and thousands of people
were dying every year. Though the crime
rate was down in areas untouched by
drug trafficking, where the cartels did
operate, car bombings and kidnappings
became commonplace. Border cities
such as Tijuana and Ciudad Juárez
started to resemble war zones. And the
violence threatened to spill into El Paso
and other nearby American communities.
In 2008, gunmen attacked the U.S.
Consulate in Monterrey with small arms
and a grenade. Thankfully no one was
injured. In March 2010, however, three
people connected to our consulate in
Ciudad Juárez were murdered. An
American employee of the consulate,
Lesley Enriquez, was shot in her car
along with her husband, Arthur Redelfs.
At nearly the same time, across town, the
Mexican husband of a locally employed
staff member of the consulate, Jorge
Alberto Salcido Ceniceros, was also
shot. These murders were another
reminder of the risks the men and women
representing our country face all over
the world, not just in places like Iraq,
Afghanistan, or Libya. The incidents
also underscored the need to help
Mexico restore order and security.
The basic fact of the drug war was
that the cartels were fighting one another
for the right to export narcotics to the
United States. An estimated 90 percent
of all the drugs used in America flowed
through Mexico, and roughly 90 percent
of the weapons used by the cartels came
from the United States. (The ban on
assault weapons that Bill signed in 1994
expired ten years later and was not
renewed, opening the door to increased
arms trafficking across the border.) It
was hard to look at these facts and not
conclude that America shared
responsibility for helping Mexico stop
the violence. In March 2009, in one of
my first trips as Secretary, I flew to
Mexico City for consultations on how
we might expand our cooperation amid
the growing violence.
I met with Calderón and his Foreign
Secretary Patricia Espinosa, a career
diplomat who became one of my favorite
colleagues and a good friend. They
outlined their needs, including for more
Black Hawk helicopters to respond to
the increasingly well-armed cartels.
Calderón was passionate about stopping
the violence against his people, and he
radiated the intensity of a man on a very
personal mission. The brazenness of the
drug cartels offended him and
undermined his plans for jobs and
education. He was also angry about the
mixed messages he believed he received
from the United States. How am I
supposed to stop the well-armed drug
traffickers, he would ask, when you
won’t stop the weapons they buy across
the border and you have states starting to
legalize the use of marijuana? Why
should my citizens, law enforcement, or
military put their lives on the line under
such circumstances? Those were
uncomfortable but fair questions.
I told Calderón and Espinosa that we
would expand the Bush Administration’s
Mérida Initiative to help law
enforcement. We asked Congress to
allocate more than $80 million for
helicopters, night-vision goggles, body
armor, and other equipment. We also
requested funding to deploy hundreds of
new border guards on our side to crack
down on gunrunning and drug smuggling.
This was an effort by the whole
administration, including Secretary of
Homeland Security Janet Napolitano,
Attorney General Eric Holder, and John
Brennan, the President’s Assistant for
Homeland Security and
Counterterrorism.
After our meeting Espinosa and I held
a joint press conference. I explained that
the Obama Administration viewed drug
trafficking as a “shared problem” and
that we recognized the challenge of
reducing demand for illegal drugs in the
United States and stopping the flow of
illegal guns across the border into
Mexico. The next day I flew north to
Monterrey. In a speech at TecMilenio
University, I reiterated this commitment.
“The United States recognizes that drug
trafficking is not only Mexico’s
problem,” I told the students. “It is also
an American problem. And we, in the
United States, have a responsibility to
help you address it.”
I thought that was a pretty obvious
thing to say. It was demonstrably true. It
was also a key tenet of the new approach
the Obama Administration intended to
take in Latin America. But I knew that
this kind of candor could come with a
cost back home. Certain media outlets
could be expected to react with hysteria
and talk of “apologizing for America.”
Political concerns are not irrelevant in
foreign policy; the United States is
strongest when we face the world united,
so building and maintaining public
support for our policies at home is
important. But in this case I was
prepared to absorb the criticism in order
to do what was right and advance our
agenda. Sure enough, the New York Post
headline screamed, “Hillary’s Drug
Shock.” I had long since stopped taking
such criticism personally, and I felt
strongly that if we wanted to improve
our standing around the world and
actually solve problems, we would have
to tell some hard truths and face the
world as it is.
Soon our expanded cooperation began
to produce dividends. Mexico extradited
more than a hundred fugitives to the
United States in 2009. Nearly two dozen
high-level drug traffickers were
captured or killed thanks to improved
intelligence and targeting. The Obama
Administration tripled funding to reduce
demand for illegal drugs in the United
States to more than $10 billion a year,
and the FBI stepped up arrests of cartel
members operating north of the border.
We helped train thousands of Mexican
police officers, judges, and prosecutors
and formed new partnerships across
Central America and the Caribbean to
make citizen security a priority of our
diplomacy in Latin America.
Our relationship became strained in
late 2010, when secret reports from our
Ambassador to Mexico Carlos Pascual
were published as part of the WikiLeaks
affair. When I returned for another visit
in January 2011, Calderón was livid.
The New York Times reported that he
was particularly upset by one leaked
report “that quoted Mr. Pascual
questioning the Mexican Army’s
reluctance to act on American
intelligence about a drug cartel leader.”
Calderón told the press that the leaks
caused “severe damage” to Mexico’s
relationship with the United States. He
complained to the Washington Post,
“It’s difficult if suddenly you are seeing
the courage of the army [questioned].
For instance, they have lost probably
300 soldiers . . . and suddenly somebody
in the American embassy, they [say] the
Mexican soldiers aren’t brave enough.”
Espinosa advised me to meet with the
President to explain and apologize.
When I did, Calderón told me that he no
longer wanted to work with Carlos and
insisted that he be replaced. It was one
of the tougher meetings I’ve ever sat
through. Afterward I told Carlos that I
had no choice but to bring him home, but
assured him I’d find a new assignment to
utilize his skills and experience. He
officially resigned from his post in
March and shortly afterward took charge
of our new bureau on global energy
issues. Espinosa and I worked hard to
repair the damage, and our cooperation
continued.

There was a good model for how an
ambitious effort like Mexico’s could
succeed: Colombia. This was a country
that had captured my imagination ever
since my brother Hugh served in the
Peace Corps there in the early 1970s. He
described it as the most rewarding
experience of his life, and after he came
home he used to regale us with stories of
his adventures. Bill thought they sounded
right out of his favorite novel, Gabriel
García Márquez’s One Hundred Years
of Solitude, but Hugh swore they were
all true. Sadly, by the 1990s, Colombia
was one of the most violent countries on
earth, terrorized by drug traffickers and
guerrillas who controlled vast swaths of
territory and who could strike at will in
any major city. Foreign policy experts
routinely referred to it as a failed state.
Bill worked with President Andrés
Pastrana to provide more than $1 billion
to fund Colombia’s campaign against the
drug cartels and the leftist rebel faction
known as the FARC. Over the following
decade, Pastrana’s successor, President
Álvaro Uribe, whose father was killed
by FARC guerrillas in the 1980s,
expanded Plan Colombia with strong
support from the Bush Administration.
But even as the government made
progress, new concerns began to arise
about human rights abuses, violence
against labor organizers, targeted
assassinations, and the atrocities of
right-wing paramilitary groups. When
the Obama Administration came into
office, we made the choice to continue
America’s bipartisan support for Plan
Colombia, but we broadened our
partnership with the government beyond
security to work more on governance,
education, and development.
By the time I visited Bogotá in June
2010, violence was down dramatically,
the insurgency was on the road to defeat,
and citizens enjoyed an unprecedented
measure of security and prosperity. By a
happy coincidence in our hectic
schedules, Bill was traveling through
Colombia on Clinton Foundation
business while I was there. We met in
Bogotá and went out for dinner with
friends and staff at a local steakhouse,
and toasted Colombia’s progress. As we
walked through the streets, we marveled
at how far the country had come. A quiet
evening stroll like this would have been
unthinkable even a few years earlier.
When I sat down with President
Uribe, we discussed Colombia’s
remaining security challenges, but they
were only one part of the agenda. We
spent time talking about how Colombia
and the United States could work
together at the UN Security Council on
global issues, how to expand trade, and
prepare for the upcoming Summit of the
Americas. Uribe was a hard-nosed,
hands-on leader. The end of his term
was approaching, and he reminisced
about the long road his country had
traveled. “You know, when I was
inaugurated eight years ago,” he told me,
“we couldn’t even hold the ceremony
outside because there were so many
attacks, there were snipers and bombs.
We’ve come such a long way.”
Uribe’s successor, Juan Manuel
Santos, who studied in the United States
in 1980 on a Fulbright scholarship,
moved to consolidate this progress and
in 2012 began negotiations with what
was left of the FARC. These talks offer
the promise of bringing lasting peace to
Colombia. I spoke by phone with
President Santos and congratulated him.
“It’s very important and symbolic and I
hope we can achieve a good ending in
this process,” he replied.
The credit for Colombia’s progress
goes to its courageous people. But I am
proud of the role that the United States
has played over three administrations to
help to reverse the country’s
disintegration, strengthen human rights
and the rule of law, and promote
economic development.

After my comments in Mexico in March
2009 about shared responsibility and
President Obama’s speech in Trinidad
and Tobago in April about equal
partnership, it was starting to feel as
though we had laid a foundation for the
new chapter of engagement we sought in
the hemisphere. Little did we know that
the month of June would test our efforts
and intentions in unexpected ways.
For me, June began in the smallest
country in Central America, El
Salvador, where I attended the
inauguration of the country’s new
President and a regional conference on
promoting broad-based economic
growth and reducing economic
inequality. Both events spoke to the
promise and potential we hoped would
come to define our relationship with
Latin America.
The combined economy of Latin
America was nearly three times the size
of India’s or Russia’s and not far behind
China’s and Japan’s. The region was
poised to accelerate out of the global
recession with growth of nearly 6
percent in 2010, and unemployment
would fall to its lowest rate in two
decades by 2011. According to the
World Bank, the middle class in Latin
America had grown by 50 percent since
2000, including an increase of more than
40 percent in Brazil and 17 percent in
Mexico. That translated to increased
prosperity for them and more than 50
million new middle-class consumers
eager to buy U.S. goods and services.
So we worked hard to improve and
ratify trade agreements with Colombia
and Panama and encouraged Canada and
the group of countries that became
known as the Pacific Alliance—Mexico,
Colombia, Peru, and Chile—all openmarket democracies driving toward a
more prosperous future to join
negotiations with Asian nations on TPP,
the trans-Pacific trade agreement. The
Alliance stood in stark contrast to
Venezuela, with its more authoritarian
policies and state-controlled economy.
Yet for all this progress, economic
inequality in Latin America was still
among the worst in the world. Despite
rapid development in many areas, parts
of Latin America remained locked in
persistent poverty. At the conference in
El Salvador, which was organized under
the banner of a regional initiative started
by the Bush Administration called
“Pathways to Prosperity,” I argued that a
key challenge for Latin America in the
years ahead would be to make sure that
the benefits of economic growth were
broadly shared and that the region’s
democracies delivered concrete results
for their citizens. “Rather than defining
economic progress simply by profit
margins and GDP, our yardstick must be
the quality of human lives,” I suggested,
so we should be measuring “whether
families have enough food on the table,
whether young people have access to
schooling from early childhood through
university, whether workers earn decent
wages and have safe conditions at their
jobs.”
A number of Latin American
countries, notably Brazil, Mexico, and
Chile, had already found success in
reducing inequality and lifting people
out of poverty. Some of the most
effective tools were “conditional cash
transfer” programs. In the 1990s Brazil
under President Fernando Cardoso
began providing regular small payments
to millions of poor families if they kept
their children in school. Later, President
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva expanded the
program to include regular medical
checkups and classes on nutrition and
disease prevention. These incentives
empowered women, increased school
attendance, improved child health, and
spurred economic growth. As the
program expanded, so did the results. In
Brazil the percentage of the population
living below the poverty line fell from
22 percent in 2003 to just 7 percent in
2009, and similar programs spread
across the hemisphere.
One area of economic cooperation
that I thought was particularly important
was energy. The United States already
sourced more than 50 percent of our
imported energy from our own
hemisphere. Further expanding
cooperation on energy and climate
change could serve as a vehicle for
bridging divides between nations,
creating economic opportunity, and
improving the environment all at the
same time. My team helped develop a
proposal for an Energy and Climate
Partnership of the Americas to support
innovation and build on the region’s
strengths. There were many examples to
learn from. Brazil was a leader on
biofuels. Costa Rica generated nearly all
of its electricity from hydropower.
Colombia and Peru were developing
clean energy mass-transit systems.
Mexico was closing landfills, capturing
the methane for power generation, and
improving the air quality of Mexico
City, greening the roofs and walls of its
buildings, and planting a massive
number of new trees in the area.
Barbados was unlocking the potential of
solar water heaters. And islands such as
Saint Kitts and Nevis and Dominica
were developing their geothermal
resources.
Over the coming years we would
build on this foundation and put special
emphasis on linking different national
and regional electrical grids from
northern Canada all the way to the
southern tip of Chile, as well as out to
the Caribbean, which pays some of the
highest electricity costs in the world.
Because the costs are so high, the
Caribbean could achieve access and
independence through solar, wind, and
biomass fuel production with zero
subsidies if the governments have the
will to shift their spending from
imported oil to homegrown clean power.
The same is true in Central America. All
this was particularly important because
31 million people across the hemisphere
still lacked access to reliable and
affordable electricity. (Worldwide the
number is 1.3 billion people.) That held
back progress in so many ways. How
can you run a successful business or
school in the 21st century without
power? The easier access people have
to energy, the better their chances of
climbing out of poverty, educating their
children, and staying healthy. So we set
a goal of seeing every community in the
region gain access to electricity by the
year 2022.
The other highlight of my visit to El
Salvador at the beginning of June 2009
was the inauguration of a new President,
Mauricio Funes. It was an occasion to
reflect on the profound political
transformation that had swept Latin
America since the end of the Cold War.
Constitutional democracies had taken
root where right-wing military
dictatorships and left-wing demagogues
had once dominated the political
landscape. In 2013 the NGO Freedom
House labeled the Americas, which
includes the United States and Canada,
“second only to Western Europe in
levels of freedom and respect for human
rights.”
The region’s political and economic
success (despite a few holdouts) made it
a model for emerging democracies
elsewhere, including in the Middle East.
And, to my great satisfaction, Latin
America was also showcasing the
power of women leaders. In a part of the
world often known for its machismo
culture, powerful and accomplished
women have led Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Costa Rica, Guyana, Jamaica,
Nicaragua, Panama, and Trinidad and
Tobago and have served as interim
leaders in Ecuador and Bolivia.

I left El Salvador and flew to Honduras
for the annual meeting of the
Organization of American States.
Honduras, roughly the size of
Mississippi, is home to about 8 million
of the poorest people in Latin America.
Its history has been marked by a
seemingly endless parade of discord and
disasters. The President of Honduras
was Manuel Zelaya, a throwback to the
caricature of a Central American
strongman, with his white cowboy hat,
dark black mustache, and fondness for
Hugo Chavez and Fidel Castro.
I woke up early on the morning of
June 2 and prepared for a long day of
multilateral diplomacy, which, thanks to
all the set-piece speeches and
procedural mumbo-jumbo, can often be
deadly boring. This day at the OAS,
however, promised drama. We expected
a number of nations to put forward a
resolution lifting the 1962 suspension on
Cuba’s membership in the organization.
By tradition the OAS operates by
consensus, meaning that even a single
country’s objection to a measure can
hold it up. But, technically, a two-thirds
majority was all it took to adopt a
resolution, if it came to that. Every vote
counter believed a big majority of
nations would support lifting the Cuba
ban because they generally viewed it as
an outdated artifact of the Cold War and
believed that engaging Cuba and
bringing it inside the family of nations
was the best way to encourage reforms
on the island. A few countries, including
Venezuela, Nicaragua, Bolivia, and
Ecuador, would characterize the ban
more harshly as an example of U.S.
bullying, and they saw bringing Cuba
back into the OAS as a way both to stick
it to the United States and weaken
democratic norms across the region.
That worried me. The OAS had adopted
a charter in 2001 codifying strong
democratic principles, and it stood as a
landmark of the region’s journey away
from its dictatorial past. We couldn’t let
Chavez and his cronies make a show of
gutting that charter.
For the new Obama Administration,
this presented an early test. We could
stick to our old policy and refuse to
support lifting Cuba’s suspension
because a dictatorship has no place in an
association of democracies, but then we
would likely alienate many of our
neighbors and make the United States
look isolated in our own backyard. Or
we could cave and admit that Cuba’s
suspension was a Cold War
anachronism, but that could make a
mockery of the region’s hard-won
democratic norms and create a firestorm
back home. Neither option was at all
appealing.
As I was getting ready in my hotel
room, I turned on CNN and saw a story
about a Cuban father living and working
in the United States who hadn’t seen his
baby boy in a year and a half because of
the restrictions on traveling between the
two countries. Thanks to the Obama
Administration’s easing of those
restrictions, father and son were finally
able to reunite. Following up on those
changes, we offered to begin talks with
the Cuban government about restoring
direct mail service and cooperation on
immigration processes. In the run-up to
this summit in Honduras, the Cubans
accepted. In short, the United States was
living up to the President’s promise of a
new beginning. But welcoming Cuba
back to the OAS without dramatic
democratic reforms was simply a
nonstarter.
For fifty years Cuba had been ruled as
a Communist dictatorship by Fidel
Castro. He and his regime denied its
people fundamental freedoms and human
rights, repressed dissent, kept a tight
hold of the state-controlled economy,
and worked to spread “the revolution” to
other countries across the region and
beyond. Despite advancing age and
declining health, Castro and his brother,
Raul, continued to rule Cuba with
absolute power.
Since 1960, the United States had
maintained an embargo against the island
in hopes of squeezing Castro from
power, but it only succeeded in giving
him a foil to blame for Cuba’s economic
woes. In late 1995 the Clinton
Administration offered Castro quiet talks
to explore the possibility of improving
relations. Those discussions were under
way when, in February 1996, a Cuban
Air Force jet shot down two small
unarmed planes, killing four crew
members. The planes were owned by a
group of Cuban exiles in Miami called
Brothers to the Rescue, who flew
periodic missions to drop anti-Castro
leaflets over Cuba. My husband called
the incident “a blatant violation of
international law.” The UN Security
Council condemned Cuba’s actions, and
the U.S. Congress passed legislation,
with large bipartisan majorities in both
houses, strengthening the embargo
against Cuba and requiring
Congressional approval for any future
changes. The experience taught me to
keep my eyes wide open when it came to
dealing with the Castros.
Since the Castro brothers were
implacably opposed to the democratic
principles enshrined in the OAS charter
and did not hide their disdain for the
institution, it was hard to see how giving
them a seat at that table would be good
for democracy or for the OAS. In fact,
given the tradition of making decisions
by consensus, it could give Cuba an
effective veto over important regional
matters.
The Castro brothers were not in
Honduras to argue their case. In fact they
expressed no interest in joining the OAS.
The charge was led by the government of
Hugo Chavez in Venezuela (although it
had wide support from others). A selfaggrandizing dictator who was more of
an aggravation than a real threat, except
to his own citizens, Chavez had shouted
and schemed against the United States
for years and worked to subvert
democracy in his own country and
across the region. He represented so
much of the negative history that the
region was trying to transcend. Chavez
had stifled political opposition and the
press in Venezuela, nationalized
companies and seized their assets,
squandered the country’s oil wealth, and
was busy turning the country into a
dictatorship.
In April, President Obama had
crossed paths with Chavez at the Summit
of the Americas. At the time Chavez
seemed delighted to shake President
Obama’s hand, and he made a big show
of presenting the President with a gift as
a gesture of his goodwill. It turned out to
be a book about U.S. imperialism and
exploitation in Latin America—so not
much of a gesture.
I regularly criticized Chavez and
defended those in Venezuela brave
enough to stand up to him. But I also
tried not to say anything that might give
Chavez an excuse to puff himself up and
ride his high horse all over the region
complaining about U.S. bullying. On
Venezuelan television he once
entertained a huge crowd by singing
“I’m not loved by Hillary Clinton . . .
and I don’t love her either” to the tune of
a popular local song. It was hard to
argue with that.
My day in Honduras began with an
early breakfast with Foreign Ministers
from across the Caribbean. We had a lot
to talk about, especially plans to respond
to growing drug violence and for greater
cooperation on energy. Most Caribbean
nations were both starved for energy and
vulnerable to the effects of climate
change, from rising sea levels to extreme
weather. So they were eager to work
with us to find solutions. But, of course,
the conversation also came around to
Cuba. “We do look forward to the day
when Cuba can join the OAS,” I assured
the Ministers. “But we believe that
membership in the OAS must come with
responsibility. And we owe it to each
other to uphold our standards of
democracy and governance that have
brought so much progress to our
hemisphere. It’s not about reliving the
past; it’s about the future and being true
to the founding principles of this
organization.”
After breakfast it was on to the main
event, the OAS General Assembly.
Secretary-General José Miguel
Insulza, a Chilean diplomat, and
President Zelaya, our Honduran host,
welcomed us to the hall and invited all
the Ministers to pose for a “family
photo.” How many of these leaders
would join us in defending the
organization’s democratic principles?
Brazil was key. Under the leadership
of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva,
Brazil had emerged as an important
global player. Lula, as he’s known, a
charismatic former trade union leader
elected in 2002, was the face of the
dynamic new Brazil, which boasted one
of the fastest growing economies in the
world and a rapidly expanding middle
class. Perhaps more than any other
country, Brazil’s rise symbolized Latin
America’s transformation and its
promise for the future.
When I first traveled to Brazil, as
First Lady in 1995, it was still a
relatively poor nation with a fragile
democracy and massive economic
inequality. Years of military dictatorship
and a leftist insurgency had given way to
a succession of weak civilian
governments, which had not produced
many results for the people. Brazil
started to modernize with the election of
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso,
who had been inaugurated a few months
before my visit. He set the country’s
economic awakening in motion, and his
wife, Ruth, an accomplished sociologist,
started a poverty-reduction agency and
conditional cash transfers to improve the
lives of women and poor families.
Cardoso was succeeded by the wildly
popular Lula, who continued his
economic policies, expanded the social
safety net to reduce poverty, and slowed
annual destruction in the Amazon rain
forest by 75 percent.
As Brazil’s economy grew, so did
Lula’s assertiveness in foreign policy.
He envisioned Brazil becoming a major
world power, and his actions led to both
constructive cooperation and some
frustrations. For example, in 2004 Lula
sent troops to lead the UN peacekeeping
mission in Haiti, where they did an
excellent job of providing order and
security under difficult conditions. On
the other hand, he insisted on working
with Turkey to cut a side deal with Iran
on its nuclear program that did not meet
the international community’s
requirements.
Still, overall I welcomed Brazil’s
growing influence and considerable
capacities to help solve problems. Later
I would enjoy working with Dilma
Rousseff, Lula’s protégée, Chief of Staff,
and eventual successor as President. On
January 1, 2011, I attended her
inauguration on a rainy but festive day in
Brasília. Tens of thousands of people
lined the streets as the country’s first
woman President drove by in a 1952
Rolls-Royce. She took the oath of office
and accepted the traditional green and
gold Presidential sash from her mentor,
Lula, pledging to continue his work on
eradicating poverty and inequality. She
also acknowledged the history she was
making. “Today, all Brazilian women
should feel proud and happy.” Dilma is
a formidable leader whom I admire and
like. In the early 1970s she was a
member of a left-wing guerrilla group
and was imprisoned and tortured by the
military dictatorship. She may not have
Lula’s colorful bravado or Cardoso’s
technical expertise, as some observers
argued, but she has a strong intellect and
true grit, two characteristics necessary
for leadership in these challenging times.
She showed her mettle in 2013, when
Brazilians, frustrated by slowing growth,
rising prices, and the perception that the
government was more focused on
preparing for high-profile events like the
2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics
than improving life for average citizens,
took to the streets in protest. Instead of
rebuffing or beating and jailing the
protestors, as many other countries have
done, including Venezuela, Dilma met
with them, acknowledged their concerns,
and asked them to work with the
government to solve the problems.
On Cuba, I knew convincing the
Brazilians would be an uphill battle.
Lula would be inclined to support lifting
the OAS suspension. But I wondered if
his desire to play the role of regional
statesman might work in our favor and
encourage him to help us broker a
compromise. I would have to feel out his
Foreign Minister Celso Amorim and see
what was possible.
Another important player would be
Chile. Like Brazil, Chile was a Latin
American success story, transitioning to
democracy in the 1990s from the brutal
military dictatorship of General Augusto
Pinochet. The role of the United States in
the 1973 coup that brought Pinochet to
power and our support for his right-wing
regime is a dark chapter in our
involvement in the region, but our more
recent relationship was strong and
productive. Michelle Bachelet, elected
in 2006 as Chile’s first woman
President, was trained as a pediatrician.
Like Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, she faced
persecution under her country’s military
dictatorship and eventually went into
political exile. She returned after the fall
of Pinochet and began her ascent through
Chile’s political ranks. As President she
worked to unite the country and address
the human rights abuses of its past,
opening a Museum of Memory and
establishing the National Institute for
Human Rights. Bachelet’s efforts on
behalf of women in her country earned
widespread praise and, after the end of
her term as President in 2010, led to her
appointment as the executive director of
the newly created United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, known as UN
Women. She and I became allies and
friends in the ongoing struggle for the
rights of women and girls. She returned
to Chile and ran successfully for a
second term as President in late 2013.
Chile favored reducing Cuba’s
isolation and had urged the United States
to lift our embargo. In early 2009,
Bachelet became the first Chilean
President in decades to visit Havana and
meet with the Castro brothers.
Afterward Fidel published a column
taking Bolivia’s side in a territorial
dispute with Chile dating from the 1870s
and criticizing the “Chilean oligarchy”
for exploiting the Bolivians. It was a
reminder of how capricious and nasty he
could be. I hoped Chile would decide to
uphold its own democratic principles
and help us defuse this crisis.
My top advisor on Latin America was
Assistant Secretary for Western
Hemisphere Affairs Tom Shannon, a
highly respected senior Foreign Service
officer who had served in five
administrations. Tom had held the top
Latin America job under Secretary Rice,
and I asked him to stay on until he could
be confirmed to serve as our
Ambassador to Brazil. Ever since Tom
laid out the pros and cons of Cuba’s
rejoining the OAS and explained what a
difficult diplomatic position we were in,
he and I had been brainstorming ways
out of the crisis. Eventually the outlines
of a plan came into focus.
Given what President Obama had said
about moving past the stale debates of
the Cold War, it would be hypocritical
of us to continue insisting that Cuba be
kept out of the OAS for the reasons it
was first suspended in 1962, ostensibly
its adherence to “Marxism-Leninism”
and alignment “with the communist
bloc.” It would be more credible and
accurate to focus on Cuba’s present-day
human rights violations, which were
incompatible with the OAS charter.
What if we agreed to lift the suspension,
but with the condition that Cuba be
reseated as a member only if it made
enough democratic reforms to bring it in
line with the charter? And, to expose the
Castro brothers’ contempt for the OAS
itself, why not require Cuba to formally
request readmittance? Perhaps that was
a compromise that Brazil, Chile, and
others would accept. We didn’t
necessarily need to win over the hardliners like Venezuela because
maintaining the status quo would be a
win in itself. But if they saw the region
moving toward a compromise, even they
might want to get on board.
After the pomp and circumstance of
the opening session was over, I went
into a side meeting of several Foreign
Ministers and presented our compromise
resolution as an alternative to the
version that lifted the suspension with no
conditions. The proposal was met with
considerable surprise in the room
because it was quite different from the
line the United States had previously
taken, although in my view it achieved
the same goals. Tom and I began making
the rounds, buttonholing Foreign
Ministers and making the case for our
plan. At midday I addressed the General
Assembly and argued that the
organization’s democratic principles and
Latin America’s democratic progress
were too important to surrender. I also
reminded my colleagues that the Obama
Administration was already taking steps
to engage Cuba.
Cuba’s backers were making their
case as well. Zelaya called the original
1962 vote to suspend Cuba “that other
day that will live in infamy” and urged
the assembly to “correct that mistake.”
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega said
the suspension was “imposed by tyrants”
and, showing his true colors, declared
that “the OAS continues to be an
instrument of domination of the United
States.” Along with the Venezuelans, the
Nicaraguans were threatening either to
call a vote, which would put everyone
on the spot, or to walk out and quit the
organization.
As the day wore on I was keenly
aware of the clock. I was supposed to
leave Honduras in the early evening to
fly to Cairo, where I was meeting
President Obama for his major address
to the Muslim world. Before I left we
needed to make sure that there wasn’t a
two-thirds majority ready to admit Cuba
without conditions. We argued to
everyone who would listen that this
would not be in the best interests of the
OAS. At one point President Obama
called Lula directly, encouraging him to
help push through our compromise. I
pulled Zelaya aside into a small room
and played up his role and
responsibilities as host of the
conference. If he backed our
compromise, he could help save not just
this summit but the OAS itself. If not, he
would be remembered as the leader who
presided over the organization’s
collapse. These appeals seemed to make
a difference. By late afternoon, though
we were far from consensus, I felt
confident that things were moving in the
right direction. Even if our resolution
didn’t pass, neither would the other one,
and I thought it was unlikely that the
OAS would disintegrate over the issue. I
headed for the airport and asked Tom to
keep me closely updated. “Bring it
home,” I told him as I got into the car.
A few hours later Tom called to tell
me that it looked like a deal might be at
hand. Our team was negotiating on final
language for the conditions, but it
seemed our compromise was gaining
support. By the end of the evening only
Venezuela, Nicaragua, Honduras, and a
few allies were holding out for their
clean resolution. Instead of the United
States being isolated, as we had
originally feared, now it was Chavez
and his crew facing a unified region.
According to some reports, Zelaya
called Chavez and suggested they bow to
the will of the majority and accept the
compromise. Whatever the reason, in the
morning they reversed course, and we
were able to achieve consensus on our
resolution. The Ministers broke into
applause when it was adopted.
In Havana, the Castro regime reacted
angrily and refused to petition for entry
into the OAS or to accept any conditions
or democratic reforms. So in effect, the
suspension remained in place. But we
succeeded in replacing an outdated
rationale with a modern process that
would further strengthen the OAS
commitment to democracy.
True to form, in December 2009, the
Castros created new problems by
arresting a USAID contractor named
Alan Gross for bringing computer
equipment to the small, aging Jewish
community in Havana. Cuban authorities
subjected him to a rump trial and then
sentenced him to fifteen years in prison.
One of my regrets as Secretary was our
failure to bring Alan home. The
Department and I stayed in close touch
with his wife, Judy, and his daughters. I
spoke out publicly about Alan and asked
numerous other countries to intervene
with Cuba. But despite the direct
engagement with Cuban officials and
numerous efforts by third parties, the
Cubans refused to release him unless the
United States released five convicted
Cuban spies serving time in prison. It is
possible that hard-liners within the
regime exploited the Gross case as an
opportunity to put the brakes on any
possible rapprochement with the United
States and the domestic reforms that
would require. If so, it is a double
tragedy, consigning millions of Cubans
to a kind of continued imprisonment as
well.
In the face of a stone wall from the
regime in Havana, President Obama and
I proceeded to engage the Cuban people
rather than the government. Based on
lessons learned all over the world, we
believed that the best way to bring
change to Cuba would be to expose its
people to the values, information, and
material comforts of the outside world.
Isolation had only strengthened the
regime’s grip on power; inspiring and
emboldening the Cuban people might
have the opposite effect. In early 2011,
we announced new rules to make it
easier for American religious groups
and students to visit Cuba and to allow
U.S. airports to allow charter flights. We
further raised the limit on remittances
Cuban Americans could send back to
family members. Hundreds of thousands
of Americans now visit the island
annually. They are walking
advertisements for the United States and
for the benefits of a more open society.
Every step of the way, we faced vocal
opposition from some members of
Congress who wanted to keep Cuba in a
deep freeze. But I remained convinced
that this kind of people-to-people
engagement was the best way to
encourage reform in Cuba and that it was
profoundly in the interests of the United
States and the region. So I was pleased
when we started to see change slowly
creeping into the country, no matter how
hard the regime hard-liners tried to stop
it. Bloggers and hunger-strikers added
their voices and examples to the
demands for freedom. I was particularly
moved by the courage and determination
of the Cuban women known as Damas de
Blanco, “Ladies in White.” Starting in
2003, they marched every Sunday after
Catholic mass to protest the continuing
detention of political prisoners. They
endured harassment, beatings, and
arrests, but they kept marching.
Near the end of my tenure, I
recommended to President Obama that
he take another look at our embargo. It
wasn’t achieving its goals, and it was
holding back our broader agenda across
Latin America. After twenty years of
observing and dealing with the U.S.Cuba relationship, I thought we should
shift the onus onto the Castros to explain
why they remained undemocratic and
abusive.

The end of the summit in San Pedro Sula
was not the end of the drama that June.
Just a few weeks later the ghosts of Latin
America’s troubled past resurfaced in
Honduras. On Sunday, June 28, 2009,
the Supreme Court of Honduras ordered
the arrest of President Zelaya amid
allegations of corruption and fears that
he was preparing to circumvent the
Constitution and extend his term in
office. Zelaya was seized and, still in his
pajamas, hustled onto a plane to Costa
Rica. A temporary government headed
by National Congress President Roberto
Micheletti assumed power.
I was at home in Chappaqua enjoying
a quiet Sunday morning when I received
word of the crisis from Tom Shannon.
He told me what we knew, which still
wasn’t much, and we discussed how to
respond. One immediate issue was
Zelaya’s wife and daughters, who were
asking to take refuge in the residence of
our Ambassador to Honduras. I told
Tom to make sure they were protected
and well cared for until the crisis could
be resolved. I also spoke with General
Jones and Tom Donilon at the White
House and called the Spanish Foreign
Minister for a quick consultation.
The forced exile of Zelaya presented
the United States with another dilemma.
Micheletti and the Supreme Court
claimed to be protecting Honduran
democracy against Zelaya’s unlawful
power grab and warned that he wanted
to become another Chavez or Castro.
Certainly the region did not need another
dictator, and many knew Zelaya well
enough to believe the charges against
him. But Zelaya had been elected by the
Honduran people, and exiling him under
cover of darkness sent a chill through the
region. No one wanted to see a return to
the bad old days of frequent coups and
unstable governments. I didn’t see any
choice but to condemn Zelaya’s ouster.
In a public statement I called on all
parties in Honduras to respect the
constitutional order and the rule of law
and to commit themselves to resolve
political disputes peacefully and through
dialogue. As required by our laws, our
government began moving to suspend aid
to Honduras until democracy was
restored. Our view was shared by other
countries in the region, including Brazil,
Colombia, and Costa Rica. Soon it
became the official position of the OAS
as well.
In the subsequent days I spoke with
my counterparts around the hemisphere,
including Secretary Espinosa in Mexico.
We strategized on a plan to restore order
in Honduras and ensure that free and fair
elections could be held quickly and
legitimately, which would render the
question of Zelaya moot and give the
Honduran people a chance to choose
their own future.
I began looking for a respected elder
statesman who could act as a mediator.
Óscar Arias, the President of Costa
Rica, which has one of the highest per
capita incomes and greenest economies
in Central America, was a natural
choice. He was a seasoned leader,
having earned the respect of the entire
world and the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize
for his work to end conflicts across
Central America. After sixteen years out
of office, he successfully ran for
President again in 2006 and became an
important voice for responsible
governance and sustainable
development. In early July, I called him.
We discussed the need to ensure that
elections occurred as scheduled in
November. He was game to try to broker
an agreement, but he was concerned that
Zelaya would not accept him as a
mediator and asked me to push the
deposed President to take a leap of faith.
That afternoon I hosted Zelaya at the
State Department. He arrived in better
shape than when he first addressed the
world from Costa Rica; the pajamas
were gone and the cowboy hat was back.
He even joked a bit about his forced
flight. “What have Latin American
presidents learned from Honduras?” he
asked me. I smiled and shook my head.
“To sleep with our clothes on and our
bags packed,” he replied.
Jokes aside, Zelaya was frustrated
and impatient. Reports from Honduras of
clashes between protesters and security
forces only heightened the tension. I told
him that we should all do everything we
could to avoid bloodshed and urged him
to participate in the mediation process to
be led by Arias. By the end of the
conversation, Zelaya was on board. I
knew that Micheletti would not accept
the mediation if he thought Zelaya had
the upper hand, so I wanted to announce
the new diplomatic effort alone, without
Zelaya by my side. As soon as we
finished talking, I asked Tom to take
Zelaya into an empty office and have the
Operations Center place a call to Arias
so the two of them could speak.
Meanwhile I hurried down to the State
Department press briefing room to make
an official announcement.
The first few days brought no
breakthroughs. Arias reported that
Zelaya was insisting on being fully
restored as President, while Micheletti
maintained that Zelaya had violated the
Constitution and refused to stand aside
until the next scheduled elections. In
other words, neither side showed any
inclination to compromise.
I stressed to Arias, “Our bottom line
is free, fair, and democratic elections
with a peaceful transfer of power.” He
agreed that firm talk was needed and
expressed frustration at the intransigence
he was encountering. “They are not
willing to give concessions,” he
explained. Then he echoed a sentiment I
think many of us felt: “I’m doing this and
am in favor of Zelaya to be restored
because of principles, Mrs. Clinton, not
because I like these people. . . . If we
allow the de facto government to stay,
the domino effect goes all around Latin
America.” That was an interesting
reformulation of the domino theory, the
famous Cold War fear that if one small
nation went Communist, its neighbors
would soon follow.
Zelaya returned to the State
Department in early September for
additional negotiations. Then, on
September 21, he secretly returned to
Honduras and resurfaced at the Brazilian
Embassy, a potentially explosive
development.
The negotiations dragged on. By late
October it was clear that Arias was
making minimal progress in bringing the
two sides to an agreement. I decided to
send Tom to Honduras to make it clear
that America’s patience had run out. On
October 23, just after 9 P.M., I received
a call from Micheletti. “There is a
growing sense of frustration in
Washington and elsewhere,” I warned
him. Micheletti tried to rationalize that
they were “doing everything in [their]
power to reach an agreement with Mr.
Zelaya.”
About an hour later I reached Zelaya,
still holed up in the Brazilian Embassy. I
informed him that Tom would be
arriving soon to help resolve the matter.
I promised that I would stay closely
involved personally and that we were
going to try to settle the crisis as soon as
possible. We knew we had to develop a
process that allowed the Hondurans
themselves to resolve this problem in a
way that both sides could accept—a tall
order, but not, as it turned out,
impossible. Finally, on October 29,
Zelaya and Micheletti signed an
agreement to set up a national unity
government to run Honduras until the
upcoming elections and establish a “truth
and reconciliation” commission to
investigate the events leading to
Zelaya’s removal from office. They
agreed to leave to the Honduran
Congress the question of Zelaya’s return
to office as part of the national unity
government.
Almost immediately there were
arguments about the structure and
purpose of the unity government, and
both sides threatened to pull out of the
agreement. Then the Honduran Congress
voted overwhelmingly not to restore
Zelaya to office, dealing him a painful
and unexpected setback. He had greatly
overestimated the depth of support in the
country for his cause. After the vote he
flew to the Dominican Republic and
spent the next year in exile. The
elections, however, went ahead. In late
November voters chose Porfirio Lobo,
who had been runner-up to Zelaya in
2005, as the new President of Honduras.
Many South American countries did not
accept this outcome, and it took a year of
additional diplomacy before Honduras
was accepted back into the OAS.
This was the first time in Central
American history that a country that
suffered a coup and was on the verge of
major civil conflict was able to restore
its constitutional and democratic
processes through negotiation, without
imposition from the outside.
If ever there were a region where we
need to look beyond the headlines to
focus on the trendlines, it’s Latin
America. Yes, there are still big
problems that have to be solved. But on
the whole, the trends are toward
democracy, innovation, more broadly
shared opportunities, and positive
partnerships among the countries
themselves and with the United States.
That’s the future we want.
13

Africa: Guns or
Growth?

Will Africa’s future be defined more
by guns and graft or growth and good
governance? Across this vast continent,
there is rising prosperity and terrible
poverty, responsible governments and
total lawlessness, lush fields and forests
and drought-stricken states. That one
region can encompass all these extremes
prompts the question that guided our
work at the State Department: How can
we help support the tremendous progress
happening in so many places across
Africa, while also helping to turn the
tide in those places where chaos and
privation still dominate?
The legacy of history hangs heavy
over this question. Many of the
continent’s conflicts and challenges stem
from colonial-era decisions that drew
borders without regard for ethnic, tribal,
or religious differences. Poor
governance and faulty economic theories
in the postcolonial era perpetuated
divisions and promoted corruption.
Rebel leaders, as is often the case
everywhere, knew how to fight but not
govern. The Cold War made much of
Africa an ideological and sometimes
real battleground between forces backed
by the West and those backed by the
Soviet Union.
The continent’s challenges remain
acute, to be sure, but there is another
side to Africa emerging in the 21st
century. Several of the fastest-growing
economies in the world are in subSaharan Africa. Since 2000, trade
between Africa and the rest of the world
tripled. Private foreign investment
surpassed official aid, and it is expected
to continue growing. Between 2000 and
2010, nonpetroleum exports from across
Africa to the United States quadrupled,
from $1 billion to $4 billion, including
clothing and crafts from Tanzania, cut
flowers from Kenya, yams from Ghana,
and high-end leather goods from
Ethiopia. Over the same period, child
mortality rates declined while primary
school enrollment increased. More
people gained access to clean water and
fewer died in violent conflicts. Africa
now boasts more cell phone users than
either the United States or Europe.
Economists expect consumer spending in
sub-Saharan Africa to grow from $600
million in 2010 to $1 trillion by 2020.
All of this means that a different kind of
future is possible. In many places, that
future has already arrived.
President Obama and I knew that
helping Africa tip toward opportunity
instead of conflict was not likely to
make big headlines back home, but it
could yield big benefits for the United
States down the road. To that end, he
visited sub-Saharan Africa earlier in his
term than any American President before
him, making a trip to Ghana in July
2009. In a speech at the Parliament in
Accra describing a new vision for
America’s support for democracy and
expanded trade in Africa, the President
memorably said, “Africa doesn’t need
strongmen. It needs strong institutions.”
He also acknowledged that historically
Western powers had too often seen
Africa as a source of resources to be
exploited or as a charity cause in need of
patronage. He issued a challenge to
Africans and Westerners alike: Africa
needs partnership, not patronage.
For all the progress being made,
however, there were too many African
nations where workers earned less than
a dollar a day, mothers and fathers died
of preventable diseases, children were
schooled with guns instead of books,
women and girls were raped as a tactic
of war, and greed and graft were the
dominant currency.
The Obama Administration’s
engagement in Africa would be built
around four pillars: promoting
opportunity and development; spurring
economic growth, trade, and investment;
advancing peace and security; and
strengthening democratic institutions.
Our approach was in sharp contrast to
the way other nations engaged across
Africa. Chinese companies, many of
them state-owned, responding to their
own immense domestic demand for
natural resources, were buying up
concessions for African mines and
forests. Starting in 2005, their direct
investment across the continent
increased thirtyfold, and by 2009, China
had replaced the United States as
Africa’s largest trading partner. A
pattern developed: Chinese companies
would enter a market and sign lucrative
contracts to extract resources and ship
them back to Asia. In return they built
eye-catching infrastructure projects like
soccer stadiums and superhighways
(often leading from a Chinese-owned
mine to a Chinese-owned port). They
even built a massive new headquarters
for the African Union in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.
There was no doubt that these projects
were welcomed by many African
leaders and that they were helping
modernize infrastructure in a continent
where just 30 percent of the roads were
paved. But the Chinese brought their
own laborers rather than hire local
workers who needed jobs and
sustainable incomes, and they paid little
attention to the health and development
challenges Western nations and
international organizations worried
about. They also turned a blind eye to
human rights abuses and antidemocratic
behavior. Strong Chinese support for the
regime of Omar al-Bashir in Sudan, for
example, significantly reduced the
effectiveness of international sanctions
and pressure, which led some activists
concerned with the genocide in Darfur to
call for boycotting the Beijing Olympics
in 2008.
I grew increasingly concerned about
the negative effects of foreign investment
in Africa, and frequently raised the issue
with Chinese and African leaders. On a
visit to Zambia in 2011, I was asked by
a TV journalist about the effects of this
kind of investment. “Our view is that
over the long run, investments in Africa
should be sustainable and for the benefit
of the African people,” I responded. We
were sitting together in a U.S.-funded
medical center focused on pediatric
HIV/AIDS. I had just met a young mother
who was HIV-positive, but because of
the treatment she was able to receive at
the center, her eleven-month-old
daughter was HIV-negative. To me, it
was a great example of the kind of
investment in Africa that America was
making. Were we doing that to make
money? No. We were doing it because
we wanted to see a healthy, prospering
Zambian people, which would ultimately
be in American interests. “The United
States is investing in the people of
Zambia, not just the elites, and we are
investing for the long run,” I said.
The journalist followed up with a
question about China in particular.
Could the Chinese economic and
political system serve as a model for
African nations, he asked, “as opposed
to the notion of good governance which
is largely seen in Africa as being
imposed by the West?” I would be the
first to applaud the job China has done
lifting millions of people out of poverty,
but in terms of good governance and
democracy, it leaves a lot to be desired.
For example, the Chinese policy of
noninterference in a nation’s internal
affairs meant ignoring or abetting the
corruption that was costing African
economies an estimated $150 billion a
year, scaring away investment, stifling
innovation, and slowing trade.
Accountable, transparent, and effective
democratic governance was a better
model. But to give the Chinese their due,
they have the capacity to get big projects
done, at home and abroad. If we wanted
to do a better job of creating opportunity
and reducing corruption, we had to do
more to increase countries’ capacity to
deliver results.
I talked about some of these
challenges in a speech in Senegal in the
summer of 2012. I emphasized that
America was pursuing “a model of
sustainable partnership that adds value
rather than extracts it.” I hoped African
leaders would become smart shoppers
and prioritize the long-term needs of
their people over the short-term benefits
of a quick payday.
Democracy was under pressure
across much of Africa. Between 2005
and 2012, the number of electoral
democracies in sub-Saharan Africa fell
from twenty-four to nineteen. That was
still far better than in the 1990s, when
there were hardly any, but it was not an
encouraging trend. Over my years as
Secretary, we saw coups in GuineaBissau, where no elected President has
ever successfully served a full five-year
term, the Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire, Mali, and Madagascar.
The United States devoted
considerable diplomatic effort to
resolving these crises. In June 2011, I
visited the headquarters of the African
Union in Ethiopia and issued a challenge
directly to the continent’s leaders: “The
status quo is broken; the old ways of
governing are no longer acceptable; it is
time for leaders to lead with
accountability, treat their people with
dignity, respect their rights, and deliver
economic opportunity. And if they will
not, then it is time for them to go.” I
invoked the upheaval of the Arab Spring,
which was washing away stagnant
governments across the Middle East and
North Africa, and suggested that without
change and a positive vision for the
future, that wave could roll across subSaharan Africa as well.
When I visited Senegal, long viewed
as a model of African democracy that
had never suffered a military coup, it
had recently weathered a constitutional
crisis. In 2011, President Abdoulaye
Wade, the country’s idiosyncratic
eighty-five-year-old leader, attempted to
circumvent constitutional limits and run
for a third term, sparking widespread
protests. This problem was all too
familiar in Africa: aging leaders,
especially former heroes of national
liberation movements who saw
themselves as the fathers of their
countries, refused to retire when the time
came or allow their country to move
forward into the future without them. The
most famous example of that is Robert
Mugabe of Zimbabwe who clings to
power while his country suffers.
In Senegal, when Wade decided to
remain in office, a handful of musicians
and young activists helped build a mass
movement with a simple slogan: “We’re
Fed Up.” Johnnie Carson, my Assistant
Secretary for African Affairs, tried to
convince Wade to put the good of the
country first, but he wouldn’t listen.
Senegal’s civil society demanded the
President honor the Constitution and step
down. They got to work registering and
educating voters. Students marched in
the streets proclaiming, “My voting card
is my weapon.” The Senegalese military,
true to its tradition, stayed clear of
politics.
In the February 2012 elections, long
lines of citizens waited to vote. Activists
fanned out to observe more than eleven
thousand polling stations, texting vote
counts and reports of irregularities to an
independent clearinghouse in Dakar,
called the Situation Room by the
Senegalese women who ran it. All in all,
it was perhaps the most sophisticated
election monitoring program ever
deployed in Africa. At the end of the day
Wade was defeated. He finally acceded
to the will of the voters, and there was a
peaceful transfer of power. I called
President-elect Macky Sall to commend
him on his victory and told him, “Even
more than your personal victory, the
peaceful transfer of power is an historic
victory for democracy.” The day after
the vote, Sall visited the Situation Room
to thank the activists who had worked so
hard to protect Senegal’s Constitution.
In my speech in Dakar that August, I
congratulated the people of Senegal and
emphasized that promoting democratic
progress was at the heart of America’s
approach in Africa:
I know there is sometimes an argument
that democracy is a privilege belonging
to wealthy countries, and that
developing economies must put
economic growth first and worry about
democracy later. But that’s not the
lesson of history. Over the long run,
you can’t have effective economic
liberalization without political
liberalization. . . . The United States
will stand up for democracy and
universal human rights, even when it
might be easier or more profitable to
look the other way, to keep the
resources flowing. Not every partner
makes that choice, but we do and we
will.

As much as any place, Liberia
represents the ongoing struggle for so
many countries in Africa between a
painful past and a hopeful future—
between guns or growth.
Americans often worry about partisan
warfare in Washington and wonder why
our elected leaders can’t seem to get
along. But our Congressional feuds pale
in comparison to the battles fought by
members of the Legislature of Liberia.
When I visited in August 2009, the
chamber was full of lawmakers who had
literally taken up arms against one
another for years. Here was Senator
Jewel Taylor, ex-wife of the former
Liberian dictator Charles Taylor, who
was then on trial at The Hague for war
crimes. There was the former warlord
turned Senator Adolphus Dolo, known
on the battlefield as General Peanut
Butter (many Liberian generals had
colorful nicknames), whose election
slogan was “Let him butter your bread.”
The fact that they were sitting together as
the elected representatives of a nation
finally at peace would have been hard to
imagine during Liberia’s long and
bloody civil war. Between 1989 and
2003 roughly 250,000 Liberians were
killed and millions fled their homes. The
story of how Liberians finally managed
to put that dark chapter behind them is
one of hope, and a testament to the role
that women can (and often must) play in
making peace, restitching the torn fabric
of society, and working together for a
better future.
In 2003 Liberian women began saying
to one another, “Enough is enough.”
Activists like the future Nobel Peace
Prize winner Leymah Gbowee formed a
movement to agitate for peace. That
spring thousands of women from all
walks of life, Christians and Muslims
together, flooded the streets, marching,
singing, and praying. Dressed all in
white, they sat in a fish market in the hot
sun under a banner that read, “The
women of Liberia want peace now.” The
warlords tried to ignore them. Then they
tried to disperse them. But the women
wouldn’t leave. Finally the warlords
agreed to begin peace negotiations. But
the talks dragged on and on, so a group
of the women traveled to the peace
conference in neighboring Ghana and
staged a sit-in. They linked arms and
blocked the doors and windows until the
men inside reached an agreement. This
story is captured in a remarkable
documentary, Pray the Devil Back to
Hell, which I highly recommend.
A peace agreement was finally
signed, and the dictator Charles Taylor
fled. Still the women of Liberia did not
rest. They turned their energies to
making sure the peace would endure and
deliver results for their families and
reconciliation for their nation. In 2005
they helped elect one of their own,
another future Nobelist, Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, as the first woman President in
Africa.
Like Nelson Mandela, President
Johnson Sirleaf grew up as the
grandchild of a chief. As a young
woman, she studied economics and
public policy in the United States,
receiving a Master of Public
Administration degree from Harvard’s
Kennedy School in 1971. Her career in
Liberian politics was a high-wire act.
She served as an Assistant Minister of
Finance but fled the country in 1980
when a coup toppled the government.
After stints at the World Bank and
Citibank, she returned in 1985 and ran
for Vice President. But she was
promptly jailed for criticizing the
repressive regime of dictator Samuel
Doe. She was pardoned amid an
international outcry, and then ran for and
won a seat in the Senate, but refused it in
protest. After being arrested and
imprisoned once again, she sought exile
in the United States in 1986. In 1997, she
was back, this time running for president
of Liberia against Charles Taylor.
Finishing a distant second, she was once
more forced into exile. After the civil
war ended in 2003 and Taylor resigned,
Johnson Sirleaf returned and finally won
the presidency in 2005, and was
reelected to a second term in 2011.
Under Johnson Sirleaf’s leadership,
the country started to rebuild. The
government adopted more responsible
fiscal policies and began to attack
corruption and promote transparency.
Liberia made progress on debt relief and
land reform, and the economy grew
despite the global economic crisis. Soon
there was free and compulsory education
for primary school children, including
girls. Johnson Sirleaf worked hard to
reform the security services and provide
the rule of law that citizens could trust.
By the time I stood before the
Legislature in 2009, I was able to
congratulate the people of Liberia and
declare that, if they kept making
progress, their country had the
opportunity “to be a model not just for
Africa, but for the rest of the world.”

That August I also visited Kenya. With
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk, I
flew into Nairobi’s Jomo Kenyatta
International Airport, named after the
founder of modern Kenya. On the day his
country was born, December 12, 1963,
he gave a famous speech that used the
word harambee, Swahili for “all pull
together,” and asked his country’s newly
independent citizens to unite as one. The
phrase was on my mind as we drove into
town from the airport and saw the
hundreds of little mom-and-pop
businesses lining the roads and then the
office towers of downtown Nairobi.
Ron and I were there to attend the
annual trade and investment meeting held
under the African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA), legislation
signed by my husband in 2000 to
increase African exports to the United
States. The United States imported
hundreds of thousands of barrels of oil
from Nigeria and Angola per day, and
we worked persistently to support
greater transparency and accountability
for oil revenues. But we also wanted to
encourage greater nonpetroleum exports,
especially from small and medium-sized
businesses.
Corruption was the major impediment
to growth in most of Africa, so I was
smiling when I entered the campus of the
University of Nairobi and saw large
crowds waving and holding banners of
welcome, one of which announced,
“You are entering a no-corruption zone.”
Inside I held a raucous town hall
discussion with students and activists,
moderated by the American journalist
Fareed Zakaria.
One of the participants was Wangari
Maathai, the Kenyan Nobel Peace Prize
winner who had led a grassroots
movement of poor women to plant trees
across Africa and reforest the continent.
I was a fan and a friend of Wangari and
was delighted to see her, and pained
when she passed away too soon in 2011.
At one point Zakaria turned to her for a
comment about China’s growing
influence and investment in Africa,
noting that she had told the press that
China was “willing to do business
without conditions like respect for
human rights.” In her response Wangari
said something that has stayed with me
ever since. “We are in a continent that is
extremely rich. Africa is not a poor
continent. Anything you want in the
world is on this continent. It’s like the
gods were on our side when the world
was being created,” she said, to
applause. “Yet we are considered
among the poorest people on the planet.
There’s something seriously wrong.”
Africans, she urged, needed to demand
good governance and accountability
from their leaders, and also from the
foreign investors and partners seeking to
do business there.
I agreed completely and offered the
example of Botswana as a model of how
good choices could lead to good
outcomes. In the mid-20th century that
landlocked nation just north of South
Africa was among the poorest places in
the world. When it gained independence
from Britain in 1966, it had only two
miles of paved roads and one public
secondary school. The next year the
future of the country changed forever
when a massive diamond mine was
discovered. Botswana’s new
government, led by President Seretse
Khama, was faced with an influx of new
wealth and powerful outside actors with
their own agendas.
Many countries in this situation have
fallen victim to the “resource curse,”
squandering their potential windfalls due
to corruption and poor governance.
Leaders have lined their own pockets or
grasped for short-term profits at the
expense of long-term sustainability.
Foreign governments and corporations
have exploited weak institutions while
leaving most people as poor as before.
But not in Botswana. Its leaders set up a
national trust fund that invests diamond
revenues in the country’s people and
infrastructure. As a result Botswana has
thrived. USAID and the Peace Corps
were able to pack up shop and go home.
Democracy took root, with regular, free,
and fair elections and a strong human
rights record. The country boasts some
of the best highways in Africa—which I
saw when Bill and I visited in 1998—
nearly universal primary education,
clean water, and one of the longest life
expectancies on the continent.
Botswana’s leaders have stressed the 5
Ds: Democracy, Development, Dignity,
Discipline, and Delivery.
If more African nations followed the
example of Botswana, many of Africa’s
challenges could finally be surmounted.
As I told the audience in Nairobi,
“Africa’s best days can be ahead if we
get a hold of this whole question of the
use of natural resources and who
benefits and where the revenues go.”
After many more questions about the
choices facing Africa’s people, Zakaria
turned to a lighter topic. Five years
earlier a Kenyan city councilman had
written Bill a letter offering forty goats
and twenty cows in exchange for our
daughter’s hand in marriage. As I
prepared to return to Nairobi, he made a
stir in the local press by announcing that
the offer was still on the table. To the
delight of the crowd, Zakaria wanted to
know what I thought of the proposal. I
paused. I’d answered a lot of questions
all over the world, but this was a first.
“Well, my daughter is her own person.
She’s very independent,” I said. “So I
will convey this very kind offer.” The
students laughed and applauded.
Despite the good feelings in the hall,
the mood outside was complex and
uncertain. The paroxysm of violence that
followed the controversial December
2007 elections led to an uneasy alliance
between former opponents, President
Mwai Kibaki and Prime Minister Raila
Amolo Odinga (a newly created
position). Their government included a
Deputy Prime Minister, Uhuru Kenyatta,
who would later be elected President
himself despite being indicted for the
violence by the International Criminal
Court.
President Kibaki and Prime Minister
Odinga brought together their Cabinet to
meet with me in the hope I would tell
them that President Obama would visit
soon. I explained instead that the
President and I were concerned about
the flawed election, political violence,
and rampant corruption, and that the
President expected more from them. My
comments led to a spirited discussion,
and I offered U.S. help to improve
Kenya’s election system. Along with the
United Kingdom, the United States
offered assistance registering voters and
electronically counting votes, which
would work well both when the country
voted in favor of a new Constitution in
2010, and when Kenyatta won the 2013
election. The United States also stepped
up our support to the Kenyan military as
it joined the fight in Somalia against Al
Shabaab, a terrorist group with ties to al
Qaeda.
Kenya is an economic and strategic
hub for East Africa, so what happens
there matters not just to Kenyans.
Improving governance and growth are
key to their stability and prosperity, and
a key priority is increasing agricultural
productivity. That’s why I visited the
Kenya Agricultural Research Institute
with U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Tom
Vilsack. We toured a soil-testing lab and
exhibitions on agricultural improvements
made possible by U.S. development aid.
For three decades, despite the fact that
farming remained the dominant form of
employment across Africa, agricultural
exports declined. The lack of roads,
inconsistent irrigation, poor storage
facilities, and ineffective farming
practices, including poor seeds and
fertilization, undermined the hard work
of farmers in the field and threatened
food supplies. Unless this problem could
be solved, neither Kenya nor Africa
would ever achieve full economic or
social potential.
Historically the U.S. government has
sent large amounts of food aid to fight
hunger in developing countries in Africa
and around the world. Delivering free
rice and wheat and other essentials
helped feed hungry families, but it also
undercut the market viability of
indigenous agriculture, encouraged
dependency, and did little to create
homegrown, sustainable solutions. We
decided to take a new approach, focused
more on building up the capacity of local
farmers and making sure the right
infrastructure was in place to get their
produce to consumers. The result was a
program we called Feed the Future. I
later visited successful programs in
Tanzania, where it had the strong
support of President Jakaya Kikwete,
and in Malawi, where President Joyce
Banda stressed the importance of
improving the country’s agricultural
productivity. To date Feed the Future
has reached more than 9 million
households, and its nutrition programs
have served more than 12 million
children under five. I’m hoping that we
will see the time when African farmers
(most of whom are women) will be able
to produce enough to feed the continent
and export the rest.

Alongside much progress, Africa still
offered many cautionary tales of
countries that have tipped into conflict
and chaos. There was probably no place
on the map more grim than the eastern
Congo.
In May 2009, Senator Barbara Boxer,
a longtime champion of women’s rights,
chaired a hearing of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee on violence against
women in war zones. She focused on the
long-running civil war in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), where
soldiers on both sides raped women as a
way of dominating communities and
gaining tactical advantage. At least 5
million people had died over fifteen
years of fighting, and millions of
refugees had fled their homes,
destabilizing the Great Lakes region of
Central Africa. The eastern city of Goma
was full of displaced people and had
become known as the rape capital of the
world. Roughly thirty-six women a day,
1,100 a month, reported rapes, and there
was no telling how many went
unreported.
Following the hearing, Senator Boxer
and two of her colleagues, Russ
Feingold and Jeanne Shaheen, sent me a
letter with a series of recommendations
about how the United States could show
greater leadership in the DRC. Horrified
by the reports coming from Goma and
concerned about the broader strategic
stakes, I asked Johnnie Carson whether a
personal visit from me could help
deliver tangible results for the women of
Goma. He thought that if I could
convince the embattled Congolese
President Joseph Kabila to accept help
to crack down on gender-based
violence, it would be worth the trip.
Plus there was no better way to draw the
attention of the world and galvanize a
more robust response from international
institutions and aid organizations. So we
decided to go.
In August 2009, I landed in Kinshasa,
the DRC’s sprawling capital on the
Congo River. The NBA star Dikembe
Mutombo, towering over me, led me on
a tour of the pediatric ward of the
Biamba Marie Mutombo Hospital,
which he had built and named in his late
mother’s honor.
At a town hall meeting at St. Joseph’s
School, I encountered an air of sullen
resignation among the young people of
Kinshasa. They had reason to feel
hopeless. The government was feckless
and corrupt, roads were nonexistent or
barely passable, hospitals and schools
were woefully inadequate. For
generations their country’s rich
resources had been plundered, first by
the Belgians, then by the notorious
dictator Mobutu (who, I am sorry to say,
profited extensively from his
manipulation of U.S. aid), and then by
the rulers who succeeded him.
It was hot and stuffy in the auditorium,
adding to the sour mood. A young man
stood up and asked a question about a
controversial Chinese loan to the
government. He was nervous and
stumbled a bit, but the translation I was
hearing came through as, “What does
Mr. Clinton think through the mouth of
Mrs. Clinton?” It sounded like he
wanted me to share my husband’s
thoughts rather than my own. In a country
where too many women were abused
and marginalized, the question infuriated
me. “Wait, you want me to tell you what
my husband thinks?” I snapped. “My
husband is not the Secretary of State. I
am. So you ask my opinion, I will tell
you my opinion. I’m not going to be
channeling my husband.” The moderator
quickly turned to another question.
After the event the young man came
over and apologized. He said he had
meant to ask about President Obama, not
President Clinton, and that the
translation had been garbled. I was sorry
I had snapped at him, not least because
the moment dominated the headlines and
overshadowed the message I wanted to
send about improving governance and
protecting women in the Congo.
The next day I left Kinshasa on a UN
transport plane and flew more than three
hours east to Goma. My first stop was to
meet President Kabila in a tent behind
the governor’s house on the shore of
Lake Kivu.
Kabila was distracted and unfocused,
seemingly overwhelmed by the many
challenges plaguing his country. One
crucial issue was figuring out how to
pay the government’s soldiers.
Undisciplined and unpaid, they had
become as much a threat to the people of
the region as the rebels who attacked
from the jungle. It wasn’t enough to
allocate money in Kinshasa. By the time
it filtered down through the ranks, nearly
all of it would be pocketed by corrupt
senior officers, leaving nothing for the
enlisted men. I offered to help his
government set up a mobile banking
system to make it easier to transfer
money directly into accounts for each
soldier. Kabila was amazed at the
potential of this technology and agreed.
By 2013 the system was being hailed as
“just short of a miracle,” although
corruption remained endemic.
After seeing Kabila, I headed to the
Mugunga camp for internally displaced
people, refugees in their own country.
More than a decade of war had
devastated towns and villages, forcing
families to abandon their homes and
belongings in search of any shelter that
offered relative security. But as is so
often the case in refugee crises, this and
other camps were plagued by problems.
Access to clean water, sanitation, and
other basic services was a continuing
challenge. The security personnel hadn’t
been paid in months. Disease and
malnutrition ran rampant.
I began by meeting with aid workers
to learn more about their experiences in
the camp. Then a Congolese man and
woman, introduced as the “elected
leaders” of the camp, gave me a tour
through the long rows of tents, small
market, and health clinic. It reminded me
of why I had become impatient about
many refugee camps. While I appreciate
the need to give people temporary
shelter during a conflict or after a
disaster, too often camps turn into semipermanent de facto detention centers,
awash with disease, poverty, and
hopelessness.
I asked the woman leading the tour
what the people there needed most.
“Well, we’d like our children to go to
school,” she said. “What?” I asked,
appalled. “There is no school? How
long have you been here?” “Nearly a
year,” she said. That drove me crazy.
The more I learned, the more questions I
had: Why were women being raped
when they went out to get firewood and
water? Why couldn’t the camp organize
patrols of the men to protect the women
coming and going? Why were babies
dying from diarrhea when medical
supplies were available? Why couldn’t
we donors do a better job of learning
and applying lessons from our
experiences in helping refugees and
internally displaced people in other
places?
In brightly colored clothing and with
exuberant, undaunted energy, the people
of the camp crowded around everywhere
I went, waving and smiling and shouting
out comments. It was inspiring to feel the
force of their spirited endurance in the
face of so much pain and destruction.
The NGO workers, doctors, counselors,
and UN officials were all doing what
they could under extremely difficult
circumstances. They worked every day
to repair the broken bodies and spirits of
women who had been raped, often by
gangs, and often in such brutal fashion
that they could no longer bear children,
work, or even walk. Despite my
criticism of conditions in the camp, I
admired the resilience I saw.
From the camp I headed to HEAL
Africa, a hospital built to treat victims of
rape and sexual attacks. In a small room
there I had heartrending conversations
with two women who had survived
brutal sexual attacks that had left each
suffering from horrible physical and
mental wounds.
If I had seen the worst of humanity on
this visit, I had also seen the best,
especially those women who, after they
had recovered from being raped and
beaten, went back into the forest to
rescue other women left to die. During
my trip to the DRC, I heard an old
African proverb: “No matter how long
the night, the day is sure to come.” These
people were doing their best to make
that day come faster, and I wanted to do
all I could to help.
I announced that the United States
would provide more than $17 million to
combat sexual violence in the DRC. The
money would fund medical care,
counseling, economic assistance, and
legal support for survivors. Nearly $3
million would be used to recruit and
train police officers to protect women
and girls, to investigate sexual violence,
and to dispatch technology experts to
help women and frontline workers use
cell phones to document and report
abuses.
Back home we also supported
legislation targeting the extraction and
sale of “conflict minerals” that helped
fund the militias that kept the conflict
going. Some of these minerals eventually
found their way into high-tech consumer
goods, including mobile phones.
A little more than a month after my
trip to Goma, in late September 2009, I
presided over a meeting of the United
Nations Security Council focused on
women, peace, and security, where I
proposed making the protection of
women and children from the kinds of
rampant sexual violence I witnessed in
the Congo a priority for UN
peacekeeping missions around the
world. All fifteen Council members
agreed. It wasn’t going to solve the
problem overnight, but it was a start.

One country that embodied hopes for the
future but seemed weighted down by its
troubled past and present was South
Sudan. It was the newest country in the
world, having gained its independence
from Sudan in July 2011, after decades
of struggle and conflict. But when I
visited in August 2012, South Sudan and
Sudan were once again locked in a
deadly dispute.
Sudan had been riven by religious,
ethnic, and political divisions since the
mid-20th century. Since 2000, genocide
in the Darfur region and intense fighting
over land and resources between the
Arab north and the Christian south had
claimed more than 2.5 million lives,
subjected civilians to unspeakable
atrocities, and sent refugees fleeing into
neighboring countries. A Comprehensive
Peace Agreement was finally signed in
2005, and it included a promise that the
South could eventually hold a
referendum on independence. But in
2010, talks broke down, and
preparations for the referendum stalled.
The peace agreement appeared close to
collapse, and a return to open conflict
seemed likely. With lots of
encouragement from the United States,
the African Union, and other members of
the international community, the two
sides pulled back from the brink. The
independence vote was held at last, in
January 2011, and in July, South Sudan
became Africa’s fifty-fourth nation.
Unfortunately the 2005 peace
agreement left some important issues
unresolved. Both sides claimed certain
border regions and were ready to
occupy them by force. Even more crucial
was the issue of oil. By a quirk of
geography, South Sudan was blessed
with extensive reserves, while Sudan
itself was not; however, the South was
landlocked and lacked refining and
shipping facilities, which the North did
have. That meant the two bitter rivals
needed each other, stuck in a symbiotic
but dysfunctional partnership.
The Sudanese government in
Khartoum, still smarting over the loss of
their southern dominions, began
demanding exorbitant prices to process
and transport the South’s oil, and it
confiscated crude when the South
refused payment. In January 2012, South
Sudan retaliated by shutting down
production altogether. For months the
two sides stuck to their guns. Both
economies, already fragile, began to
crumble. Inflation soared. Millions of
families faced food shortages. Soldiers
readied for renewed fighting and clashes
broke out in oil-rich border areas. It
seemed like the definition of a lose-lose
scenario.
So in August I flew to Juba, the new
capital of South Sudan, to try to broker a
deal. It had taken years of patient
diplomacy to end the civil war and
midwife the birth of a new nation, and
we couldn’t let that achievement fall
apart now. What’s more, with intense
efforts under way around the world to
convince energy-hungry nations to
reduce consumption of Iranian oil and
shift to new suppliers, we could ill
afford to see Sudanese oil go off the
market.
But the new President of South Sudan,
Salva Kiir, wouldn’t budge. I listened to
him explain all the reasons why South
Sudan couldn’t compromise with the
North on an oil deal. Behind all the
arguments about pricing and refining
was a simple human reality: these battlescarred freedom fighters couldn’t bring
themselves to move beyond the horrors
of the past, even if it meant starving their
new nation of the resources it needed to
thrive. When the President paused, I
decided to try a different tack. I took out
a copy of an op-ed that had run in the
New York Times just a few days before
and slid it across the table. “Before we
go any further, I would appreciate you
reading this,” I told him. President Kiir
was curious; this was unusual behavior
in a high-level diplomatic meeting. As
he began to read, his eyes widened.
Pointing to the byline, he said, “He was
a soldier with me.” “Yes,” I replied,
“but now he’s a man of peace. And he
remembers that you fought together for
freedom and dignity, not for oil.”
Bishop Elias Taban is one of the most
remarkable people I’ve ever met. He
was born in 1955 in the city of Yei in
South Sudan, when it was still under
British colonial rule. That same day
forces from the North massacred dozens
of people in town, and Elias’s mother
fled into the jungle with her screaming
infant. His umbilical cord was freshly
cut, and his mother used crushed leaves
to stop the bleeding. For three days they
hid, before finally returning home. As he
grew, Elias was caught up in the
country’s endless civil war. He became
a child soldier at age twelve, alongside
his father. Eventually the elder Taban
managed to get Elias to the Ugandan
border and told him to flee. He was
found on the other side by UN relief
workers.
By 1978 Elias was back in southern
Sudan, living in Juba. He met a group of
evangelists from Kenya and felt called to
become a man of faith. He earned
degrees in civil engineering and
theology and learned to speak English,
Lingala, Arabic, Bari, and Swahili.
When war broke out again in the 1980s,
Bishop Taban and his wife, Anngrace,
both joined the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement and fought for
southern Sudan’s independence. After
the peace agreement in 2005, he devoted
himself to promoting reconciliation and
sustainable development. He and his
followers build schools, orphanages,
hospitals, and clean water wells.
In July 2012, dismayed by the
continuing conflict between North and
South, Bishop Taban published a plea
for peace. His op-ed made a significant
impression on me. “There must always
come a point,” he wrote, “where we
look forward and recognize the need to
stop fighting over past wrongs so we can
build toward a new future.” That is one
of the hardest lessons for people to learn
on any level, personal or political, but it
is profoundly important in a world
where so many societies are still held
back by old enmities and conflicts.
I watched President Kiir read his old
comrade’s words, and his defiance
seemed to soften. Perhaps now we could
get down to business. I kept emphasizing
that “a percentage of something is better
than a percentage of nothing.” Finally
President Kiir agreed to reopen
negotiations with the North to try to find
a compromise on oil pricing. At 2:45
A.M. the next day, after a marathon

negotiation in Ethiopia, the two sides
reached a deal so that the oil could begin
flowing again.
It was a step in the right direction, but
hardly the end of the story. Tensions
continued to simmer between the
neighbors and within South Sudan itself.
In late 2013, tribal divisions and
personal feuds erupted in a spasm of
violence that threatens to tear the country
apart. As of 2014, the future of Africa’s
youngest nation is full of uncertainty.
Before leaving Juba that August, I
asked to meet Bishop Taban so I could
thank him in person for his powerful
words. When he and his wife came to
the U.S. Embassy, they proved to be
even more dynamic and inspiring than I
had expected, and they got a big kick out
of hearing my story about distributing his
op-ed in the Presidential Palace.
In September 2013, I was honored to
invite Bishop Taban to the Clinton
Global Initiative meeting in New York
and present him with a Global Citizen
Award for his peacemaking efforts. He
told the audience that American
engagement in the oil dispute had been
“an answer for prayers” and that, while
many challenges remained for his
country, the fragile peace was holding.
Then he pointed to an eight-month-old
baby sitting on his wife’s lap. The boy
had been discovered in the jungle near
Yei in February. The police had called
Bishop Taban and Anngrace for help.
After some soul-searching, Anngrace
said, “If it is a call of God in our life,
we have no choice. Let them bring the
child.” The police were relieved, but
then they said, “Bishop, wait a minute.
The cord is not cut. We want to rush to
the hospital and make sure that it’s cut.”
The Bishop and his wife took this echo
of his own birth as a sign, and they
brought Little John home to live with
their four other adopted children in a
country still struggling to grow beyond
its own difficult birth.

For decades Somalia has been one of the
poorest, most war-torn nations in the
world, a classic failed state. Persistent
conflict between rival warlords and
extremists, prolonged drought,
widespread hunger, and periodic
disease outbreaks left roughly 40 percent
of the population in need of emergency
humanitarian aid. For Americans, the
name Somalia conjures up painful
memories of the troubled UN
humanitarian mission launched by
President George H. W. Bush in late
1992 to ensure that food aid reached
starving Somalis without interference by
clashing warlords. My husband
continued the mission when he became
President. The tragic “Black Hawk
Down” incident, in which eighteen
American soldiers were killed in
Mogadishu, became a lasting symbol of
the dangers of American involvement in
messy global hotspots. Bill pulled our
troops out of Somalia, and for the next
fifteen years the United States remained
reluctant to commit military resources to
Africa, although we remained active
with political and humanitarian efforts.
Yet, by 2009, Somalia’s problems
were too great for the United States to
ignore. The violent extremist group Al
Shabaab, which has links to al Qaeda,
represented a growing threat to the entire
region. The terrorist attacks of 9/11 had
driven home the lesson that failed states
could become staging grounds for strikes
far beyond their borders. Pirates based
in Somalia were also posing an
increasing threat to international
shipping in the Gulf of Aden and the
Indian Ocean, highlighted by the April
2009 hijacking of the Maersk Alabama,
dramatized in the 2013 movie Captain
Phillips. So the United States and the
international community had a
compelling interest in arresting
Somalia’s slide into oblivion and
helping bring some semblance of order
and stability to the Horn of Africa. Here
was a guns-or-growth question with
major implications for our own national
security.
In the spring and summer of 2009 Al
Shabaab was on the offensive,
overwhelming the forces of Somalia’s
weak transitional government in the
capital of Mogadishu and the African
Union troops deployed to protect it. The
extremists reached within a few city
blocks of the Presidential Palace. I told
Johnnie Carson, “We can’t let the
Somali government fail and we can’t let
Al Shabaab win.” Johnnie later told me
that he lay awake that night racking his
brain for ideas of how we could act
quickly and effectively enough to
prevent a terrorist victory. The most
urgent need was to get the government
cash to pay its troops and purchase
ammunition to fight off the extremists. I
encouraged Johnnie to be creative in
providing what the beleaguered Somali
troops needed. Over that summer,
Johnnie arranged to deliver the needed
funds and hired accountants to track the
money. The State Department also
arranged for a contractor to fly in a few
planeloads of small arms and
ammunition from Uganda. It wasn’t
much, but it provided the beleaguered
Somali troops the support they needed to
take a stand and begin to push Al
Shabaab back.
In August, I arranged to meet with the
President of Somalia’s transitional
government, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed. He flew to Nairobi to sit down
with me at the U.S. Embassy. Sheikh
Sharif was a strictly religious Islamic
scholar who had fought an unsuccessful
war to replace the government with a
system of religious law courts (although
he also won acclaim for negotiating the
release of kidnapped children). After
losing on the battlefield, he had won at
the ballot box and, for the moment,
appeared to be focused on protecting
Somalia’s tenuous democracy and
improving life for its people. Not that it
would matter much if his government
was defeated by Al Shabaab.
I found Sheikh Sharif, a young-looking
forty-five-year-old, to be intelligent and
forthright. He wore a white Islamic
prayer hat and a blue business suit with
a lapel pin depicting Somali and
American flags. I thought that nicely
captured the delicate balance he was
trying to strike. In our conversation he
was candid about the enormous
challenges facing his country and fragile
government. I told him that the United
States would continue to send millions
of dollars of military aid to his
beleaguered forces and step up training
and other support. But in return, his
government would have to commit to
making real progress toward
establishing an inclusive democracy that
brought together the country’s divided
factions. Doing that would take
substantial political will, especially
from Sheikh Sharif himself.
As we talked, I wondered: Would he
shake my hand? That was not a question
I had to ask very often as the chief
diplomat of the most powerful nation on
earth, despite the sexism still rampant in
many parts of the world. Even in the
most conservative countries where
women had little contact with men
outside their families, I was nearly
always received respectfully. But would
this conservative Islamic scholar risk
alienating his supporters by shaking the
hand of a woman in public, even if it
was the U.S. Secretary of State?
When we finished, we walked outside
and held a joint press conference. I
shared my belief that Sheikh Sharif’s
government represented “the best hope
we’ve had in quite some time” for the
future of Somalia. (Privately I told
Johnnie we were going to have to
redouble our efforts to help the country
get back on track.) As we parted, to my
delight, Sheikh Sharif grabbed my hand
and gave it an enthusiastic shake. A
Somali journalist in the crowd shouted a
question about whether such a gesture
was against Islamic law. Sheikh Sharif
just shrugged him off and kept smiling.
Throughout 2009 the Obama
Administration increased support for the
transitional government and allied
African Union forces. Nearly $10
million in targeted aid began to turn the
tide against Al Shabaab. Working
together, the State Department and the
Pentagon stepped up training of
thousands of Somali troops in Uganda,
sending them back into Mogadishu
supplied with food, tents, gasoline, and
other essentials. We also increased our
training and assistance for the African
peacekeepers fighting alongside the
Somali troops. We flew in
reinforcements directly from Uganda,
Burundi, Djibouti, Kenya, and Sierra
Leone.
To combat piracy, we set up a task
force with the Department of Defense
and other agencies and worked with
allies and partners around the world to
create an international naval force to
patrol the most dangerous waters. Even
China, usually reluctant to participate in
such efforts, joined in. By 2011 pirate
attacks off the Horn of Africa had
declined by 75 percent.
To help bolster the still relatively
weak transitional government, we
embedded technical advisors to oversee
the distribution of increased economic
development assistance. Eventually the
lights came back on in Mogadishu and
the streets started being cleaned again.
Our emergency humanitarian aid kept
hungry Somalis alive and gave people
the hope and strength needed to reject
the extremist insurgency and begin
rebuilding their country.
To provide a plan for the future, we
launched a diplomatic offensive to bring
together Somalia’s East African
neighbors and the international
community behind a single road map for
political reconciliation and the
establishment of a permanent democratic
government that represented all of the
country’s clans and regions. (The
“transitional” government had been in
place for years, with few signs of
forward movement.)
In the years that followed, Somalia
weathered several crises and made
halting progress in strengthening
democratic institutions and implementing
the international road map. There were
several times when the process seemed
stalled and Al Shabaab rebounded and
made tactical gains on the battlefield.
The extremists continued to carry out
terrorist attacks, including a suicide
bombing in October 2011 in Mogadishu
that killed more than seventy people,
many of whom were young students
waiting in line to receive test results.
But in September 2011 key leaders from
across Somalia’s fractured political
spectrum pledged to implement the road
map, finalize a new Constitution, and
select a new government by mid-2012.
There was a lot to get done in a short
amount of time, but at least there was a
plan and a commitment.
In August 2012, just weeks before
Somalia was supposed to hold elections
and hand over power to new leaders, I
once again met with Sheikh Sharif in
Nairobi. We were joined by other
leaders from Somalia’s various clans
and factions. I praised them for the
progress they had achieved but
emphasized how important it was to
proceed with the elections and a
peaceful transfer of power. That would
send a powerful message about
Somalia’s trajectory toward peace and
democracy.
In September, Somalis elected Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud President of the new,
permanent government. Sheikh Sharif
finished a distant second and, admirably,
bowed out gracefully.
Our diplomatic work to support
Somalia and to coordinate a military
campaign against Al Shabaab also had
ancillary benefits in the region, helping
us develop closer ties to East African
partners and improving the capacity of
the African Union to take the lead in
providing African solutions to African
problems.
In August 2012, I visited the Kasenyi
Military Base, near Lake Victoria in
Uganda, and talked with U.S. Special
Operations troops helping train and
support the African forces. They showed
me some of the small Raven unmanned
surveillance drones that were helping
the African Union troops go after Al
Shabaab. They looked like a child’s
model airplane, and when I picked one
up, it was surprisingly light. Yet it was
loaded with sophisticated cameras, and
the Ugandans were delighted to have
them.
I was glad that American innovation
was making a difference in this
important fight, and I told the American
and Ugandan soldiers that I hoped we
could use this new technology also to
speed the capture of the notorious
warlord Joseph Kony. He and his
murderous Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) had been wreaking havoc across
Central Africa for years. Kony
kidnapped children from their homes,
forcing girls into sexual slavery and
boys into service in his rebel army. His
murderous rampage displaced tens of
thousands of Africans and forced
countless more to live in perpetual fear.
Kony’s atrocities became infamous in
2012 through a documentary that became
a worldwide internet sensation. I had
long been disgusted and outraged by
what this monster was doing to children
in Central Africa and was eager to see
him brought to justice. I urged the White
House to help coordinate diplomatic,
military, and intelligence resources to
track down Kony and the LRA.
President Obama decided to deploy a
hundred U.S. Special Operations troops
to support and train African forces
hunting for Kony. To work with them, I
sent State Department experts from our
new Bureau of Conflict and Stabilization
Operations, which I had created to
increase the Department’s ability to
work in crucial hotspots. Our civilian
team arrived on the ground a few months
before the troops and began building
relationships in local communities. With
their encouragement, village chiefs and
other leaders started actively
encouraging defections from the LRA,
including through a new radio station we
helped set up for them. It was a small
mission, but I thought it showed the
potential of what we could achieve
when soldiers and diplomats lived in the
same camps, ate the same MREs (Meals,
Ready-to-Eat), and focused on the same
goals. That’s smart power in action.
Now, if we could use those drones I was
inspecting to see through the thick jungle
canopy, we might finally be able to
locate Kony and end his atrocities. In
March 2014, President Obama
announced that the United States would
send additional Special Operations
forces and aircraft to find him. The
international community should not rest
until he is found and defeated.
Meanwhile, in Somalia, Al Shabaab
has lost most of the territory it once
controlled. But the group remains a
lethal threat, both to Somalia and the
wider region. We saw this with tragic
consequences in September 2013, when
Al Shabaab terrorists attacked a
shopping mall in Nairobi and killed
more than seventy people. Among the
dead was Elif Yavuz, a thirty-threeyear-old Dutch nurse working for CHAI,
the Clinton Health Access Initiative,
which combats HIV/AIDS and other
diseases. She was eight-and-a-halfmonths pregnant. Elif’s Australian
partner, Ross Langdon, and their unborn
child were also killed. My husband had
met Elif on a trip to Tanzania just six
weeks earlier and remembered her as
beloved by her colleagues. “This
beautiful woman comes up to me, very
pregnant. She was so pregnant that I
assured her that I had been a Lamaze
father and could be pressed into service
at any moment,” he recalled afterward.
When Bill reached Elif’s grieving
mother to offer our condolences, she told
him the family had decided to name her
unborn child and they were looking at
the Swahili words for life and love. It
was heartbreaking for all of us at the
Foundation and a reminder that terrorism
remains an urgent challenge for our
country and the world.
Like so many development workers, Elif
Yavuz dedicated her life to helping
overcome the scourge of HIV/AIDS and
other diseases, including malaria. For
Africa, this is a pivotal challenge, with
implications for long-term development,
prosperity, and peace. In 2003,
President George W. Bush launched the
ambitious President’s Emergency Plan
for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). There are
more than 35 million people living with
HIV around the world, more than 70
percent of them in sub-Saharan Africa.
When I became Secretary, I was
determined to support and expand
PEPFAR. I began by convincing Dr.
Eric Goosby to head the program as our
Global AIDS Coordinator. As a
physician in San Francisco in the early
1980s, he had started treating patients
with a mysterious disease that would
one day be recognized as AIDS. He later
joined the Clinton Administration and
ran the program named for Ryan White,
a young American who contracted the
disease from a blood transfusion.
In August 2009, Eric and I traveled to
a PEPFAR clinic outside Johannesburg,
South Africa. Inside we met with the
new South African Minister of Health,
Dr. Aaron Motsoaledi. With
Motsoaledi’s appointment that May,
South African President Jacob Zuma
signaled a shift away from his
predecessor’s denial of South Africa’s
enormous HIV/AIDS problem and
toward an aggressive new effort to
combat and treat the disease. In that first
meeting Motsoaledi told me that South
Africa would not have enough money to
buy the drugs to treat patients in all nine
provinces and asked for our help.
This was a problem I was familiar
with. Starting in 2002, Bill and a team at
CHAI led by Ira Magaziner worked with
pharmaceutical makers to reduce the
cost of HIV/AIDS drugs and help
millions of people afford the medicine
they needed. By 2014 more than 8
million patients around the world have
access to HIV/AIDS medicine at much
lower cost in no small part because of
CHAI’s efforts. And not just a little
cheaper—up to 90 percent cheaper.
Yet by 2009, even though South
Africa was a large manufacturer of
generics, the government was still
buying large quantities of brand-name
antiretroviral drugs. PEPFAR, CHAI,
and the Gates Foundation worked with
them to complete a shift to generics,
which now constitute a vast majority of
their purchases. The Obama
Administration invested $120 million in
2009 and 2010 to help South Africa buy
the less costly medicine. As a result
more than double the number of people
have been treated. By the end of my
tenure, many more people were on
antiretroviral drugs in South Africa, and
the government had saved hundreds of
millions of dollars in the process, all of
which it put back into improving health
care. When I returned to South Africa in
August 2012, the government was
preparing to take over management of all
the HIV/AIDS programs in the country
and to oversee a large-scale expansion
of treatment with a goal of treating 80
percent of those in need by 2016.
I knew that we had to build on
PEPFAR’s success with fewer
resources in an age of shrinking aid
budgets. Through the use of generic
antiretroviral drugs, consolidation of
clinics, and more efficient
administration and distribution,
PEPFAR was able to save hundreds of
millions of dollars, which allowed us to
expand the program without asking
Congress for additional funding. The
number of patients treated with
antiretroviral drugs paid for by PEPFAR
together with country investments and
support from the Global Fund rose from
1.7 million in 2008 to nearly 6.7 million
in 2013.
The results were above and beyond
what I had hoped for. According to the
United Nations, since 2000 the rate of
new HIV infections has dropped by
more than half in many parts of subSaharan Africa. People are living longer
and accessing more and better
treatments. HIV/AIDS, a disease that
used to kill 100 percent of patients, is no
longer a death sentence.
Because of these successes and the
advances of science, I declared an
ambitious new goal on World AIDS Day
in 2011: an AIDS-free generation. That
means a generation in which no child is
born with the virus, young people are at
far lower risk of being infected
throughout their lives, and those who do
contract HIV have access to treatment
that will prevent them from developing
AIDS and from passing the virus on to
others. HIV may be with us well into the
future, but AIDS need not be.
To achieve this goal, we have to focus
on targeting key populations, identifying
people at risk, and getting them the
prevention and care they need as quickly
as possible. If we continue to drive
down the number of new infections and
drive up the number of people on
treatment, eventually we will be able to
treat more people than become infected
every year. That will be the tipping
point. It’s treatment as prevention.
In August 2012, I visited the Reach
Out Mbuya Health Center in Kampala,
Uganda, where I met a patient named
John Robert Engole. Eight years earlier,
having contracted AIDS, John Robert
was near death, having dropped ninetynine pounds and developed tuberculosis.
He became the first person in the world
to receive life-saving medication
through PEPFAR. Miraculously he was
still alive and thriving—a living and
breathing example of the promise that
American support can bring to the
people of the world. And he proudly
introduced me to two of his children.

Nobody symbolizes the pain of Africa’s
past or the promise of its future more
than Nelson Mandela. Mandela is rightly
hailed as a larger-than-life hero. But he
was, in fact, deeply human and full of
complexity: a freedom fighter and also a
champion of peace; a prisoner and a
President; a man of anger and
forgiveness. Madiba, as his clan, family,
and friends called him, spent all those
years in prison learning to reconcile
these contradictions and become the
leader he knew his country needed.
I first went to South Africa in 1994
for Mandela’s inauguration. For those of
us who witnessed the ceremony, it was
an unforgettable moment. Here was a
man who had spent twenty-seven years
as a political prisoner now being sworn
in as President. And his journey
represented something even larger: a
long but steady march toward freedom
for all South Africa’s people. His moral
example helped a system born out of
violence and division end in truth and
reconciliation. It was the ultimate gunsor-growth decision.
That day I had breakfast with outgoing
President F. W. de Klerk at his official
residence and then returned for lunch
with the new President. In the course of
a few hours the entire history of a nation
had changed. At the lunch President
Mandela stood to greet the many highlevel delegates from around the world.
Then he said something that has stayed
with me always (I’m paraphrasing here):
“The three most important people to me,
here in this vast assembly, are three men
who were my jailers on Robben Island. I
want them to stand up.” Mandela called
them by name and three middle-aged
white men stood up. He explained that in
the midst of the terrible conditions in
which he was held for so many years,
each of those men saw him as a human
being. They treated him with dignity and
respect. They talked to him; they
listened.
In 1997, I returned to South Africa,
this time with Chelsea, and Mandela
took us to Robben Island. As we
retraced his steps through the cells, he
said that when he was finally released,
he knew he had a choice to make. He
could carry the bitterness and hatred of
what had been done to him in his heart
forever, and he would still be in prison.
Or he could begin to reconcile the
feelings inside himself. The fact that he
chose reconciliation is the great legacy
of Nelson Mandela.
Before that visit my head was
preoccupied with all the political battles
and hostility in Washington, but listening
to Madiba talk, I felt those troubles
falling back into perspective. I also
loved watching Chelsea’s face light up
around him. They developed a special
bond that lasted for the rest of his life.
Whenever he and Bill talked on the
phone, Madiba would ask to talk to
Chelsea, and he stayed in touch with her
as she went off to Stanford and Oxford
and then moved to New York.
On my first visit to South Africa as
Secretary, in August 2009, I paid a call
on Madiba at his office in a suburb of
Johannesburg. At ninety-one he was
frailer than I remembered, but his smile
still lit up the room. I pulled my chair
close and held his hand, and we talked
for half an hour. I also was delighted to
see Madiba’s remarkable wife, my
friend Graça Machel. Before marrying
Mandela, she was a political activist
and a Minister in Mozambique’s
government, married to Samora Machel,
the President of Mozambique, who
helped guide that war-torn country
toward peace. He died in a suspicious
plane crash in 1986.
Together Graça and I walked through
the Nelson Mandela Foundation Centre
of Memory and Dialogue, where I
examined some of Madiba’s prison
diaries and letters, early photographs,
and even his Methodist Church
membership card from 1929. As a
fellow Methodist, I was struck by his
commitment to self-improvement, a topic
he mentioned often, and his unshakable
discipline.
Mandela’s successors, Thabo Mbeki
and Jacob Zuma, struggled with
translating his legacy into reality for a
nation that was still too violent and too
poor. Both men harbored suspicions of
the West left over from the decades
when the United States supported the
apartheid government as a bulwark
against Communism during the Cold
War. They wanted South Africa to be
respected as the most powerful nation in
the region and taken seriously on the
world stage. That’s what we wanted too,
and I hoped that a strong and prosperous
South Africa would be a force for peace
and stability. But respect comes from
taking responsibility.
In some instances South Africa could
be a frustrating partner. President
Mbeki’s denial of the science around the
HIV/AIDS epidemic was a tragic
mistake, and South Africa usually
opposed international humanitarian
intervention, even in dire cases such as
Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, when civilians
were under attack. Sometimes it was
difficult to interpret the reasons behind
the government’s actions. Just before my
final visit to the country, in August 2012,
the South Africans refused at the last
minute to allow my Diplomatic Security
team to bring the vehicles and weapons
they needed into the country. My plane
sat on the tarmac in Malawi, waiting to
hear how the negotiations unfolded. In
the end the matter was resolved, and we
were finally able to take off. I was
leading a delegation of American
business leaders from FedEx, Chevron,
Boeing, General Electric, and other
companies who were looking to expand
their investments in South Africa.
We had worked with the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce to organize the
trip because more trade between
America and South Africa promised to
create jobs and opportunities in both
countries. More than six hundred
American businesses had already put
down roots in South Africa. In 2011, for
example, Amazon opened a new
customer care center in Cape Town that
employed five hundred people, with
plans to hire as many as a thousand
more. A renewable energy company
based in Louisville, Kentucky, called
One World Clean Energy, signed a $115
million deal for a biorefinery in South
Africa to simultaneously produce
electricity, natural gas, ethanol, and
biodiesel from organic material. The
facility was built in the United States
and shipped to South Africa in 2012,
employing 250 people in South Africa
and up to a hundred skilled trade
workers in Kentucky. The American
executives I brought along had a chance
to meet two hundred South African
business leaders to talk about prospects
for similar mutually beneficial
investments.
At a dinner in Pretoria we were
greeted by a rare snowfall (August is
winter in the Southern Hemisphere), and
some South Africans started calling me
Nimkita, “The one who brought the
snow.” There was a lot to discuss with
my diplomatic counterpart, International
Relations and Co-operation Minister
Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. She is a
strong woman with a good sense of
humor and firm views on her country’s
prerogatives, who became a friend.
Maite hosted dinners for me on both my
visits. The guests were predominantly
women leaders, including Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma, who became the first
woman elected to head the African
Union. During the 2012 visit a talented
South African jazz and pop singer got us
all up on our feet. We danced, sang, and
laughed together on that snowy night.
On that trip I also paid a final visit to
my old friend Madiba, who was living
in his ancestral village of Qunu, in the
Eastern Cape province of South Africa.
There he had spent much of his boyhood,
and according to his autobiography, it
was the scene of his happiest years. As I
walked into his modest house among the
rolling hills, I was struck, as always, by
his incredible smile and uncommon
grace. Even in failing health, Mandela
was the embodiment of dignity and
integrity. He was, until the end, the
captain of his “unconquerable soul,” as
described in his favorite poem,
“Invictus” by William Ernest Henley.
My spirits were still soaring from our
time together when I arrived at the
University of the Western Cape in Cape
Town for a speech about the future of
South Africa and the continent. In my
closing sentences I tried to evoke for the
young people there just how far they and
we had all come because of Mandela.
Recalling his humanity toward his
former jailers, I asked them to help us
create a world of mutual understanding
and justice, where every boy and girl
can have a fighting chance. I reminded
them that the great burden of coming
from a country admired by the rest of the
world, as both the United States and
South Africa are, requires adherence to
a set of higher standards. It was his
willingness to accept that heavy burden
that always set Nelson Mandela apart.
On December 5, 2013, Nelson
Mandela died at the age of ninety-five.
Like so many others around the world, I
grieved the passing of one of the greatest
statesmen of our time, and the loss of a
dear friend. He had meant so much to
our whole family for so long. President
Obama asked us to accompany him to the
funeral, along with Michelle and George
W. and Laura Bush. I joined them, and
Bill and Chelsea, who were in Brazil,
flew to meet us there.
On the flight over in Air Force One,
the President and Mrs. Obama occupied
their cabin at the front of the plane. Its
two beds, shower, and office make the
long flight more bearable for any First
Family. The Bushes were assigned the
room usually occupied by the medical
team. I was in the senior staff room. The
Obamas invited the Bushes and me to
join them in the big conference room.
George, Laura, and I talked about “life
after the White House,” and George
described his newfound passion for
painting. When I asked him if he had any
photos of his work, he fetched his iPad
to show us his latest subjects, bleached
animal skulls found on his ranch. He
explained that he was practicing how to
paint different shades of white. It was
clear he had a natural talent and had
worked hard to learn the art. The
atmosphere was warm and relaxed.
Regardless of politics, we’ve had a
unique experience, and finding time to
catch up and trade stories is invariably
educational and often entertaining.
The memorial ceremony was held in a
stadium in Soweto under a steady rain.
Present and former Kings, Queens,
Presidents, Prime Ministers, and
dignitaries from around the world joined
thousands of South Africans to pay
tribute to the man President Obama
called “a giant of history.”
After the public ceremony, Bill,
Chelsea, and I visited privately with
Graça, other family members, and close
staff at their home in Johannesburg. We
signed a book of memories in Mandela’s
honor and recalled stories of his
remarkable life. Another friend, the rock
star and activist Bono, had also come to
the public memorial. He had become a
passionate and effective advocate for
fighting poverty across the world, and he
developed a partnership and deep
friendship with Mandela. Back at the
hotel where we were staying, he sat
down at a big white piano and played a
song in Madiba’s memory. I’m no Condi
Rice on the piano, but Bono was
generous enough to let me sit next to him
and hit a few keys, which delighted my
more musical husband.
I thought back to Madiba’s
inauguration in 1994 and marveled at all
he and his nation had accomplished. But
I also hoped that South Africa would
take this sad moment to recommit itself
to following the course Mandela had
begun, toward a stronger, more inclusive
democracy and a more just, equal, and
humane society. I hoped the same for all
of us around the world. When he
accepted the Nobel Peace Prize,
Mandela shared his dream of “a world
of democracy and respect for human
rights, a world freed from the horrors of
poverty, hunger, deprivation and
ignorance.” With that kind of vision,
anything is possible, and one of my
fondest hopes is that a 21st-century
Africa will emerge that creates
opportunity for its young people,
democracy for its citizens, and peace for
everyone. That would be an Africa
worthy of Nelson Mandela’s long walk
to freedom.
PART FIVE

Upheaval
14

The Middle East: The
Rocky Path of Peace

The Palestinian flag has three
horizontal stripes, black, white, and
green, with a red triangle jutting out from
the hoist. From the time of the Six Day
War in 1967 until the Oslo Peace
Accords in 1993, it was banned in the
Palestinian territories by the Israeli
government. It was seen by some as an
emblem of terrorism, resistance, and the
intifada, the violent uprising against
Israeli rule that rocked the Palestinian
territories in the late 1980s. Even
seventeen years after Oslo, the flag
remained a controversial and
inflammatory symbol among some
conservative Israelis. So it was a
surprise to arrive in mid-September
2010 at the official residence in
Jerusalem of Prime Minister Benjamin
“Bibi” Netanyahu, leader of the rightwing Likud Party, and find the black,
white, green, and red colors of the
Palestinians hanging next to the familiar
blue and white flag of Israel.
Flying the Palestinian flag, which Bibi
had criticized when his predecessor,
Ehud Olmert, had done it some years
before, was a conciliatory gesture from
the Prime Minister to his other guest that
day, Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas. “I’m glad you came to
my house,” Bibi said, as he greeted
Abbas. The Palestinian President
stopped in the entryway to sign the
Prime Minister’s guest book: “Today I
returned to this house after a long
absence, to continue the talks and
negotiations, hoping to reach an eternal
peace in the entire region and especially
peace between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples.”
The exchange of kind words could not
paper over the pressure we all felt that
day. As we sat down in Netanyahu’s
small private study and began to talk, a
deadline hung over our heads. In less
than two weeks a ten-month moratorium
on the construction of new Israeli
settlements in the West Bank would
expire. Unless we could reach an
agreement to extend the freeze, Abbas
had pledged to withdraw from the direct
negotiations we had only just begun—
and Netanyahu was holding firmly to his
position that ten months was more than
enough. It had taken nearly two years of
difficult diplomacy to get these two
leaders to agree to negotiate face-to-face
on resolving a conflict that had plagued
the Middle East for decades. They were
finally grappling with core issues that
had eluded all previous efforts at
peacemaking, including the borders of a
future Palestinian state; security
arrangements for Israel; refugees; and
the status of Jerusalem, a city both sides
claimed as their capital. Now it looked
like they might walk away from the table
at a crucial moment, and I was far from
confident that we would find a way out
of the impasse.

I visited Israel for the first time in
December 1981 on a church trip to the
Holy Land with Bill. While my parents
babysat for Chelsea back in Little Rock,
we spent more than ten days exploring
the Galilee, Masada, Tel Aviv, Haifa,
and the ancient streets of Jerusalem’s
Old City. We prayed at the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre, where Christians
believe Jesus was buried and
resurrected. We also paid our respects
at some of the holiest sites for
Christians, Jews, and Muslims,
including the Western Wall, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, and the Dome of the Rock. I
loved Jerusalem. Even amid all the
history and traditions, it was a city
pulsing with life and energy. And I
deeply admired the talent and tenacity of
the Israeli people. They had made the
desert bloom and built a thriving
democracy in a region full of
adversaries and autocrats.
When we left the city and visited
Jericho, in the West Bank, I got my first
glimpse of life under occupation for
Palestinians, who were denied the
dignity and self-determination that
Americans take for granted. Bill and I
both came home from that trip feeling a
strong personal bond to the Holy Land
and its peoples, and over the years we
held on to the hope that one day Israelis
and Palestinians might resolve their
conflict and live in peace.
Over the next thirty years I would
return to Israel again and again, making
friends and getting to know and work
with some of Israel’s great leaders. As
First Lady I developed a close
friendship with Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin and his wife, Leah, although I
don’t think Yitzhak ever forgave me for
banishing him to the cold air of the
White House balcony when he wanted to
smoke. (After Rabin accused me of
endangering the peace process with this
policy I finally relented and said, “Well,
if it will further the effort toward peace,
I will rescind the rule, but only as it
applies to you!”) The signing of the Oslo
Accords by Rabin and Arafat,
accompanied by their famous handshake
on the South Lawn of the White House,
made September 13, 1993, one of the
best days of Bill’s presidency. Rabin’s
assassination on November 4, 1995, was
one of the worst. I will never forget
sitting with Leah and listening to their
granddaughter Noa’s heartrending
eulogy at his funeral in Israel.
Nor will I forget the Israeli victims of
terrorism I met over the years. I’ve held
their hands in hospital rooms and
listened to doctors describe how much
shrapnel was left in a leg, arm, or head. I
visited a bombed-out pizzeria in
Jerusalem in February 2002 during some
of the darkest days of the second
intifada, in which a few thousand
Palestinians and about a thousand
Israelis were killed between 2000 and
2005. And I’ve walked along the
security fence near Gilo and talked to
families who knew a rocket could fall on
their home at any moment. These
experiences will always be with me.
Here’s just one story of an Israeli who
touched my life. In 2002, I met Yochai
Porat. He was only twenty-six but
already a senior medic with MDA,
Israel’s emergency medical service. He
oversaw a program to train foreign
volunteers as first responders in Israel. I
attended the program’s graduation
ceremonies and remember the pride in
his face as yet another group of young
people set off to save lives. Yochai was
also a reservist with the Israel Defense
Forces. A week after we met, he was
killed by a sniper near a roadblock,
along with other soldiers and civilians.
MDA renamed its overseas volunteer
program in his memory. When I visited
again in 2005, I met with Yochai’s
family, who spoke passionately about
how important it was to continue
supporting the MDA and its mission. I
went home and began a campaign to
convince the International Red Cross to
admit MDA as a full voting member
after half a century of exclusion. In 2006,
they agreed.
I am not alone in feeling so personally
invested in Israel’s security and success.
Many Americans admire Israel as a
homeland for a people long oppressed
and a democracy that has had to defend
itself at every turn. In Israel’s story we
see our own, and the story of all people
who struggle for freedom and the right to
chart their own destinies. That’s why
President Harry Truman waited only
eleven minutes to recognize the new
nation of Israel in 1948. Israel is more
than a country—it’s a dream nurtured for
generations and made real by men and
women who refused to bow to the
toughest of odds. It’s also a thriving
economy that’s a model for how
innovation, entrepreneurship, and
democracy can deliver prosperity even
in unforgiving circumstances.
I was also an early voice calling
publicly for Palestinian statehood.
During satellite remarks to the Seeds of
Peace Middle East Youth Summit in
1998, I told the young Israelis and
Palestinians that a Palestinian state
would “be in the long-term interest of
the Middle East.” My comments
received considerable media attention,
coming two years before Bill, near the
end of his presidency, proposed
statehood in a plan Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak accepted but Arafat
didn’t, and three years before the Bush
Administration made statehood official
U.S. policy.
The Obama Administration came into
office during a perilous time in the
Middle East. Throughout December
2008, militants from the Palestinian
extremist group Hamas fired rockets into
Israel from the Gaza Strip, which it had
controlled since forcing out its rival
Palestinian faction, Fatah, in 2007. In
early January 2009, the Israeli military
invaded Gaza to stop the rocket attacks.
In the final weeks of the Bush
Administration, Israeli troops battled
Hamas gunmen in the streets of densely
populated areas. “Operation Cast Lead”
was deemed a military victory for Israel
—Hamas suffered heavy casualties and
lost much of its stockpile of rockets and
other weapons—but it was also a public
relations disaster. More than one
thousand Palestinians died, and Israel
faced widespread international
condemnation. On January 17, just days
before President Obama’s inauguration,
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert announced
a cease-fire beginning at midnight, if
Hamas and another radical group in
Gaza, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
stopped firing rockets. The next day the
militants agreed. The fighting stopped,
but Israel maintained a virtual siege
around Gaza, closing the borders to most
traffic and commerce. Hamas, using
secret smuggling tunnels that went under
the border with Egypt, immediately
began rebuilding its arsenal. Two days
later President Obama took the oath of
office in Washington.
With the crisis in Gaza dominating
world attention, my first call to a foreign
leader as Secretary of State was to
Olmert. We immediately turned to how
to preserve the fragile cease-fire and
protect Israel from further rocket fire, as
well as address the severe humanitarian
needs inside Gaza. We also talked about
restarting negotiations that could end the
broader conflict with the Palestinians
and deliver a comprehensive peace to
Israel and the region. I told the Prime
Minister that President Obama and I
would announce former Senator George
Mitchell as a new Special Envoy for
Middle East Peace later that day. Olmert
called Mitchell “a good man” and
expressed his hope that we could work
together on all the areas we discussed.
At the start of March, I joined
representatives from other international
donor countries at a conference in Egypt
to raise humanitarian aid for needy
Palestinian families in Gaza. It was a
step toward helping traumatized
Palestinians and Israelis put the latest
violence behind them. Whatever you
thought of the tangled politics of the
Middle East, it was impossible to ignore
the human suffering, especially the
children. Palestinian and Israeli children
have the same right as children
everywhere in the world to a safe
childhood with a good education, health
care, and the chance to build a bright
future. And parents in Gaza and the West
Bank share the same aspirations as
parents in Tel Aviv and Haifa for a good
job, a secure home, and better
opportunities for their kids.
Understanding that is a vital starting
point for bridging the gaps that divide
the region and providing the foundation
for lasting peace. When I made this point
at the conference in Egypt, members of
the normally hostile Arab media broke
into applause.
In Jerusalem I had the pleasure of
seeing my old friend President Shimon
Peres, a lion of the Israeli left who had
helped build the new state’s defense,
negotiated Oslo, and carried forward the
cause of peace after Rabin’s
assassination. As President, Peres had a
largely ceremonial role, but he served as
the moral conscience of the Israeli
people. He still believed passionately in
the need for a two-state solution, but he
recognized how hard it would be to
achieve. “We don’t take it lightly, the
burden that is now lying on your
shoulders,” he told me. “But I think they
are strong, and you will find in us a real
and sincere partner in the double
purpose to prevent and stop terror and
achieve peace for all of the people in the
Middle East.”
I also consulted with Olmert and his
smart, tough Foreign Minister Tzipi
Livni, a former Mossad agent, on
defusing tensions in Gaza and
strengthening the cease-fire. With
sporadic rocket and mortar attacks
continuing, it seemed that full-fledged
conflict could flare up again at any time.
I also wanted to reassure Israel that the
Obama Administration was fully
committed to Israel’s security and its
future as a Jewish state. “No nation
should be expected to sit idly by and
allow rockets to assault its people and
its territories,” I said. For years, under
both Democratic and Republican
administrations, the United States had
been committed to helping Israel
maintain a “qualitative military edge”
over every competitor in the region.
President Obama and I wanted to take it
to the next level. Right away, we got to
work expanding security cooperation
and investing in key joint defense
projects, including Iron Dome, a shortrange missile defense system to help
protect Israeli cities and homes from
rockets.
Olmert and Livni were determined to
move toward a comprehensive peace in
the region and a two-state solution to the
conflict with the Palestinians, despite the
many disappointments over decades of
halting negotiations. But they were soon
on their way out of power. Olmert had
announced his resignation under a cloud
of corruption charges, mostly stemming
from his earlier service as Mayor of
Jerusalem. Livni assumed the leadership
of their Kadima Party and ran in new
elections against Netanyahu and Likud.
Kadima actually won one more seat in
the Israeli Parliament, the Knesset, than
Likud (twenty-eight seats for Kadima,
compared to twenty-seven for Likud),
but Livni couldn’t put together a viable
majority coalition among the fractious
smaller parties that held the balance of
power. So Netanyahu was given a
chance to form a government.
I talked to Livni about the idea of a
unity government between Kadima and
Likud that might be more open to
pursuing peace with the Palestinians. But
she was dead set against it. “No, I’m not
going into his government,” she told me.
So Netanyahu put together a majority
coalition of smaller parties and, at the
end of March 2009, returned to the
Prime Minister’s office he had occupied
from 1996 to 1999.
I had known Netanyahu for years. He
is a complicated figure. He spent his
formative years living in the United
States, studied at both Harvard and MIT,
and even worked briefly at the Boston
Consulting Group with Mitt Romney in
1976. Netanyahu has been deeply
skeptical of the Oslo framework of
trading land for peace and a two-state
solution that would give the Palestinians
a country of their own in territory
occupied by Israel since 1967. He is
also understandably fixated on the threat
to Israel from Iran, especially the
possibility of Tehran acquiring nuclear
weapons. Netanyahu’s hawkish views
were shaped by his own experience in
the Israel Defense Forces, especially
during the Yom Kippur War of 1973; the
memory of his brother Yonatan, a highly
respected commando killed leading the
Entebbe raid of 1976; and the influence
of his father, Benzion, an ultranationalist
historian who had favored a Jewish state
encompassing all of the West Bank and
Gaza since before the birth of the State
of Israel. The elder Netanyahu held fast
to that position until he died in 2012 at
age 102.
In August 2008, after the end of my
Presidential campaign, Netanyahu came
to see me in my Senate office on Third
Avenue in New York. After a decade in
the political wilderness following his
defeat in the 1999 elections, Bibi had
climbed his way back up to the top of
Likud and was now poised to retake the
Prime Minister’s office. Sitting in my
conference room above Midtown
Manhattan, he was philosophical about
his twists of fortune. He told me that
after being voted out, he received some
advice from Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher, the Iron Lady herself: “Always
expect the unexpected.” Now he was
giving me the same advice. A few
months later, when President-elect
Obama first said the words “Secretary
of State” to me, I thought back to what
Bibi had predicted.
Later we would both look back on that
conversation as a new beginning in our
relationship. Despite our policy
differences, Netanyahu and I worked
together as partners and friends. We
argued frequently, often during phone
calls that would go on for over an hour,
sometimes two. But even when we
disagreed, we maintained an
unshakeable commitment to the alliance
between our countries. I learned that
Bibi would fight if he felt he was being
cornered, but if you connected with him
as a friend, there was a chance you
could get something done together.
With the region still reeling from the
Gaza conflict, and a skeptic back at the
helm in Israel, the prospects for reaching
a comprehensive peace agreement
seemed daunting, to say the least.
There had been nearly a decade of
terror, arising from the second intifada,
which started in September 2000. About
a thousand Israelis were killed and eight
thousand wounded in terrorist attacks
from September 2000 to February 2005.
Three times as many Palestinians were
killed and thousands more were injured
in the same period. Israel began
constructing a long security fence to
physically separate Israel from the West
Bank. As a result of these protective
measures, the Israeli government
reported a sharp decline in suicide
attacks, from more than fifty in 2002 to
none in 2009. That was, of course, a
great source of relief for Israelis. But it
also lessened the pressure on them to
seek even greater security through a
comprehensive peace agreement.
On top of that, the number of Israeli
settlers in the West Bank continued to
grow, and most of them were adamantly
opposed to giving up any land or closing
any settlements in what they called
“Judea and Samaria,” the biblical name
for the land on the West Bank of the
Jordan River. Some settlers who moved
to these outposts across the 1967 “Green
Line” were simply trying to avoid a
housing crunch in expensive Israeli
cities, but others were motivated by
religious zeal and a belief that the West
Bank had been promised to Jews by
God. Settlers were the political base of
Netanyahu’s main coalition partner, the
Yisrael Beiteinu Party, led by Avigdor
Lieberman, a Russian émigré who
became Foreign Minister in the new
government. Lieberman viewed
negotiating concessions as a sign of
weakness and had a long history of
opposition to the Oslo peace process.
Bibi and Lieberman also believed that
Iran’s nuclear program was a bigger and
more urgent threat to Israel’s long-term
security than the Palestinian conflict. All
of this contributed to a reluctance among
Israel’s leaders to make the hard choices
necessary to achieve a lasting peace.

After visiting with both the outgoing and
the incoming Israeli leadership in
Jerusalem in early March 2009, I
crossed into the West Bank and headed
to Ramallah, the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority (PA). Under
previous agreements, the PA
administered parts of the Palestinian
territories and maintained its own
security forces. I visited a classroom
where Palestinian students were learning
English through a U.S.-sponsored
program. They happened to be studying
Women’s History Month and learning
about Sally Ride, America’s first
woman astronaut. The students,
especially the girls, were captivated by
her story. When I asked for a single
word to describe Sally and her
accomplishments, one student
responded, “Hopeful.” It was
encouraging to find such a positive
attitude among young people growing up
under such difficult circumstances. I
doubted one would hear the same
sentiment in Gaza. For me, that summed
up the divergence of fortunes between
the two Palestinian territories.
For nearly twenty years two factions,
Fatah and Hamas, have vied for
influence among the Palestinian people.
When Arafat was alive, his Fatah party
was ascendant and his personal stature
was enough to largely keep the peace
between the two. But after he died in
2004, the schism burst into open
conflict. To those disillusioned by a
peace process that had failed to deliver
much concrete progress, Hamas peddled
the false hope that a Palestinian state
could somehow be achieved through
violence and uncompromising
resistance. By contrast, Arafat’s
successor as head of Fatah and the
Palestinian Liberation Organization,
Mahmoud Abbas (also known as Abu
Mazen), maintained a platform of
nonviolence and urged his people to
keep pushing for a negotiated political
solution to the conflict, while building
up the economy and institutions of a
future Palestinian state.
In early 2006, Hamas won legislative
elections in the Palestinian territories
that had been pushed by the Bush
Administration over objections by some
members of Fatah and the Israelis. The
upset victory led to a new crisis with
Israel and a violent power struggle with
Fatah.
After the election results came in, I
released a statement from my Senate
office condemning Hamas and stressing,
“Until and unless Hamas renounces
violence and terror, and abandons its
position calling for the destruction of
Israel, I don’t believe the United States
should recognize Hamas, nor should any
nation in the world.” The outcome was a
reminder that genuine democracy is
about more than winning an election, and
that if the United States pushes for
elections, we have a responsibility to
help educate people, and parties, about
the process. Fatah had lost several seats
because it ran two candidates in districts
when Hamas fielded only one. It was a
costly mistake. The next year Hamas led
a coup in Gaza against the authority of
Abbas, who continued to serve as
President despite his party’s losses in
the legislative elections. With Fatah still
in control in the West Bank, the
Palestinian people were split between
two competing power centers and two
very different visions for the future.
This division made the prospects of
resuming peace talks more remote and
increased Israeli reluctance. However,
as a result of this unusual arrangement,
both sides were able to test their
approach to governing. The results could
be seen every day in Palestinian streets
and neighborhoods. In Gaza, Hamas
presided over a crumbling enclave of
terror and despair. It stockpiled rockets
while people fell deeper into poverty.
Unemployment ran to nearly 40 percent,
and was even higher among young
people. Hamas impeded international
assistance and the work of humanitarian
NGOs and did little to promote
sustainable economic growth. Instead
Hamas sought to distract Palestinians
from its failure to govern effectively by
stoking new tensions with Israel and
inciting popular anger.
Meanwhile, in the West Bank, Abbas
and Prime Minister Salam Fayyad, an
able technocrat, produced very different
results in a relatively short period of
time. They got to work addressing a
history of corruption and building
transparent and accountable institutions.
The United States and other international
partners, especially Jordan, helped
improve the effectiveness and reliability
of PA security forces, which was a key
priority for Israel. Reforms began to
increase public confidence in the courts,
and in 2009 they handled 67 percent
more cases than in 2008. Tax revenues
were finally being collected. The PA
began building schools and hospitals and
training teachers and medical staffs. It
even started work on a national health
insurance program. More responsible
fiscal policies, support from the
international community—including
hundreds of millions of dollars each
year from the United States, the PA’s
largest bilateral donor—and improving
security and the rule of law led to
significant economic growth. Despite
ongoing economic challenges, more
Palestinians in the West Bank were
finding jobs, starting businesses, and
reversing the economic stagnation that
followed the outbreak of the second
intifada in 2000. The number of new
business licenses issued in the West
Bank in the fourth quarter of 2009 was
50 percent higher than in the same
period in 2008, as Palestinians opened
everything from venture capital funds to
hardware stores and luxury hotels.
Unemployment in the West Bank fell to
less than half the rate in Gaza.
Even with this progress, there was
much more work to do. Too many
people remained frustrated and out of
work. Anti-Israeli incitement and
violence were still problems, and we
hoped to see greater reforms to crack
down on corruption, instill a culture of
peace and tolerance among Palestinians,
and reduce dependence on foreign
assistance. But it was becoming easier
to envision an independent Palestine
able to govern itself, uphold its
responsibilities, and ensure security for
its citizens and its neighbors. The World
Bank reported in September 2010 that if
the Palestinian Authority maintained its
momentum in building institutions and
delivering public services, it would be
“well-positioned for the establishment
of a state at any point in the near future.”
I saw the progress firsthand on visits
to the West Bank in 2009 and 2010.
Well-equipped Palestinian security
officers, many of them trained with U.S.
and Jordanian assistance, lined the road.
Driving into Ramallah, I could see new
apartment buildings and office towers
rising from the hills. But as I looked at
the faces of the men and women who
came out of their shops and homes, it
was impossible to forget the painful
history of a people who have never had
a state of their own. Economic and
institutional progress is important,
indeed necessary, but it is not sufficient.
The legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people will never be
satisfied until there is a two-state
solution that ensures dignity, justice, and
security for all Palestinians and Israelis.
I will always believe that in late 2000
and early 2001, Arafat made a terrible
mistake in refusing to join Prime
Minister Barak in accepting the “Clinton
Parameters,” which would have given
the Palestinians a state in the West Bank
and Gaza, with a capital in East
Jerusalem. Now we were trying again
with President Abbas. He had worked
long and hard to realize the dreams of
his people. He understood those dreams
could be achieved only through
nonviolence and negotiation. And he
believed an independent Palestine living
side by side with Israel in peace and
security was both possible and
necessary. I sometimes thought that
while Arafat had the circumstances
required to make peace but not the will,
Abbas may have had the will but not the
circumstances, though at some of our
more frustrating moments, I wondered
about his will, too.

Coaxing the Israelis and the Palestinians
back to the negotiating table was not
going to be easy. There was no great
mystery about what a final peace deal
might look like and the compromises that
would have to be struck; the challenge
was mobilizing the political will on both
sides to make the choices and sacrifices
necessary to accept those compromises
and make peace. Our diplomatic efforts
had to focus on building trust and
confidence on both sides, helping the
leaders carve out political space to
negotiate with each other, and making a
persuasive case that the status quo was
unsustainable for everyone.
I was convinced that was true. For the
Palestinians, decades of resistance,
terrorism, and uprisings had not
produced an independent state, and more
of the same was not going to do anything
to advance their legitimate aspirations.
Negotiations offered the only credible
path to that goal, and waiting just meant
prolonging the occupation and suffering
on both sides.
For the Israelis, the case was harder
because the status quo was less
obviously and immediately problematic.
The economy was booming, improved
security measures had dramatically
reduced the threat of terrorism, and many
Israelis felt that their country had tried to
make peace and received nothing in
return but heartbreak and violence. In
their eyes, Israel had offered generous
deals to Arafat and Abbas, and the
Palestinians had walked away. Under
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Israel had
unilaterally withdrawn from Gaza
(without a negotiated peace agreement),
which had turned into a terrorist enclave
that lobbed rockets into southern Israel.
When Israel pulled back from southern
Lebanon, Hezbollah and other militant
groups, with Iranian and Syrian support,
used the territory as a base for attacking
northern Israel. What reason did Israelis
have to think that giving up more land
would lead to actual peace?
I was sympathetic to those fears and
to the threats and frustrations behind
them. But as someone who cares deeply
about Israel’s security and future, I
thought there were compelling
demographic, technological, and
ideological trends that argued for making
another serious attempt at a negotiated
peace.
Because of higher birth rates among
Palestinians and lower birth rates among
Israelis, we were approaching the day
when Palestinians would make up a
majority of the combined population of
Israel and the Palestinian territories, and
most of those Palestinians would be
relegated to second-class citizenship and
unable to vote. As long as Israel insisted
on holding on to the territories, it would
become increasingly difficult and
eventually impossible to maintain its
status as both a democracy and a Jewish
state. Sooner or later, Israelis would
have to choose one or the other or let the
Palestinians have a state of their own.
At the same time, the rockets flowing
into the hands of Hamas in Gaza and
Hezbollah in Lebanon were increasingly
sophisticated and capable of reaching
Israeli communities far from the borders.
In April 2010, there were reports that
Syria was transferring long-range Scud
missiles to Hezbollah in Lebanon, which
could reach all of Israel’s major cities.
In the spring of 2014, Israel intercepted
a ship carrying Syrian-made M-302
surface-to-surface rockets bound for
Palestinian militants in Gaza that could
reach all of Israel. We would continue
building up Israel’s air defenses, but the
best missile defense system of all would
be a just and lasting peace. And the
longer the conflict dragged on, the more
it would strengthen the hand of
extremists and weaken moderates across
the Middle East.
For all these reasons, I believed it
was necessary for Israel’s long-term
security to give diplomacy another
chance. I had no illusions that it would
be any easier to reach an agreement than
it had been for previous administrations,
but President Obama was ready to invest
his own personal political capital, and
that counted for a lot. Netanyahu,
precisely because of his well-known
hawkishness, had the credibility with the
Israeli public to cut a deal, like Nixon’s
going to China, if he were convinced it
was in Israel’s security interests. Abbas
was aging and there was no telling how
long he could hold on to power; we
couldn’t take for granted that his
successor, whomever it would be,
would be as committed to peace. With
all his political baggage and personal
limitations, Abbas might well be the
last, best hope for a Palestinian partner
committed to finding a diplomatic
solution and determined enough to sell
one to his people. Yes, there was always
a danger in diving back into the
quagmire of Middle East peace
negotiations. Trying and failing could
well discredit moderates, embolden
extremists, and leave the parties more
distrustful and estranged than before. But
success was impossible if we didn’t try,
and I was determined to do so.
The first step toward jump-starting the
peace process in January 2009 was
appointing George Mitchell as Special
Envoy so he could try to repeat the
success he had achieved with the Good
Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland.
The soft-spoken former Senator from
Maine was always quick to point out the
differences between the two conflicts,
but he also drew encouragement from the
fact that Northern Ireland had once been
deemed as intractable as the Middle
East and had been resolved through
painstaking negotiations. “We had 700
days of failure and one day of success,”
he often said. On the other hand, when
Mitchell remarked to an audience in
Jerusalem that it took eight hundred
years of conflict before peace finally
came to Northern Ireland, one elderly
gentleman scoffed, “Such a recent
argument—no wonder you settled it!”
President Obama agreed with me that
Mitchell possessed the international
prestige, negotiating skills, and patient
temperament to take on this crucial task.
I also asked Dennis Ross, who had
served as Middle East Special Envoy
during the 1990s, to come back to the
State Department to work on Iran and
regional issues. President Obama was so
impressed with Ross that he soon asked
him to move to the White House to
advise him more closely, including on
the peace process. There were
sometimes tensions between Ross and
Mitchell, given their overlapping
responsibilities and the high stakes of
the assignment, but I valued both of their
perspectives and was grateful to have
two such experienced foreign policy
thinkers as part of our team.
Only days after his appointment,
Mitchell headed out to the region for a
multistop tour. The Israelis were still
sorting out their new government, so
Mitchell made the rounds of the Arab
capitals. His mandate included working
for peace not just between Israel and the
Palestinians but also between Israel and
all its neighbors. The basis for a
comprehensive regional peace would
likely be a plan proposed in 2002 by
King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. The
plan was unanimously endorsed by all
Arab League members, including Syria,
in March 2002. Under the Arab Peace
Initiative, as it’s called, all those
countries, and some Muslim-majority
nations outside the region, agreed that in
return for a successful peace agreement
with the Palestinians, they would
normalize relations with Israel,
including economic, political, and
security cooperation. If this could be
achieved, it would have profound
implications for the strategic dynamics
of the Middle East. Because of their
shared suspicion of Iran and their
partnerships with the United States,
Israel and many of the Arab states,
especially the Gulf monarchies, should
have been natural allies. Enmity over the
Palestinian conflict prevented that.
Before the 2008–2009 war in Gaza,
Turkey had been trying to broker peace
talks between Israel and Syria. If Syria
could be pried away from its toxic
alliance with Iran in exchange for
progress on the Golan Heights—the
territory it lost to Israel in 1967—that
too would have significant strategic
consequences.
In nearly every capital Mitchell heard
the same thing: Israel needed to stop
building settlements on land that would
one day become part of a Palestinian
state. Each new settlement beyond the
old 1967 lines would make it harder to
reach a final agreement. For decades the
United States had opposed the expansion
of settlements as counterproductive to
peace efforts. President George H. W.
Bush and his Secretary of State, Jim
Baker, considered suspending loan
guarantees to Israel over the issue.
President George W. Bush called for a
full construction freeze in his “Roadmap
for Peace.” But given Netanyahu’s
political ties to the settlers, he could be
expected to balk at any limitations.
After his initial consultations,
Mitchell suggested that we ask all three
parties—the Israelis, the Palestinians,
and the Arab states—to take specific
constructive steps to show good faith
and lay the foundation for a return to
direct peace negotiations.
For the Palestinian Authority, we
wanted it to do more to crack down on
terrorism and reduce anti-Israeli
incitement. Examples of incitement
included renaming a public square in the
West Bank after a terrorist who
murdered Israeli civilians, whipping up
conspiracy theories claiming that Israel
was planning to destroy Muslim holy
places, and actions that glorified and
encouraged further violence. As for
Hamas, its isolation would continue until
it renounced violence, recognized Israel,
and pledged to abide by previous signed
agreements. Without those basic steps,
Hamas would not get a seat at the table.
We also demanded the immediate
release of Gilad Shalit, a kidnapped
Israeli soldier being held in Gaza.
For the Arab states, we hoped to see
steps toward normalization with Israel
as envisioned under the Arab Peace
Initiative, including allowing overflight
rights for Israeli commercial air traffic,
reopening trade offices, and establishing
postal routes. Netanyahu pressed me on
this over dinner at the State Department
in May 2009. He especially wanted to
see action from Saudi Arabia, whose
role as “Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques” would give its gestures
outsized significance in the region. In
June 2009, President Obama traveled to
Riyadh and personally raised this issue
with King Abdullah.
For the Israelis, we requested that
they freeze all settlement construction in
the Palestinian territories without
exception. In retrospect, our early hard
line on settlements didn’t work.
Israel initially refused our request,
and our disagreement played out in
public, becoming a highly personal
standoff between President Obama and
Netanyahu, with the credibility of both
leaders on the line. That made it very
hard for either one to climb down or
compromise. The Arab states were
happy to sit on the sidelines and use the
dustup as an excuse for their own
inaction. And Abbas, who had
consistently called for a halt to
settlement construction for years, now
claimed it was all our idea and said that
he wouldn’t come to the peace table
without a moratorium on settlement
construction.
The President and his advisors had
debated the wisdom of making a demand
for a settlement freeze. The strongest
voice in favor of doing so was Rahm
Emanuel’s, the White House Chief of
Staff. Rahm, a former civilian volunteer
with the Israel Defense Forces, had a
deep personal commitment to Israel’s
security. Drawing on his experiences in
the Clinton Administration, he thought
that the best way to deal with
Netanyahu’s new coalition government
was to take a strong position right out of
the gate; otherwise he’d walk all over
us. The President was sympathetic to
that argument, and he thought insisting on
a settlement freeze was both good policy
and smart strategy since it would help
reestablish America as an honest broker
in the peace process, softening the
perception that we always took the side
of the Israelis. Mitchell and I worried
we could be locking ourselves into a
confrontation we didn’t need, that the
Israelis would feel they were being
asked to do more than the other parties,
and that once we raised it publicly
Abbas couldn’t start serious negotiations
without it. A senior Israeli official once
explained to me that for Israelis, the
worst thing in the world is to be a freier,
the Hebrew slang word for “sucker.”
Israeli drivers would rather end up in
the hospital than let someone cut them
off on the highway, he told me. Bibi
himself was once quoted as saying, “We
are not freiers. We don’t give without
receiving.” I feared that in this light, our
demands for a settlement freeze would
not be well-received. But I agreed with
Rahm and the President that if we were
going to revive a moribund peace
process, we had to take some risks. So
that spring I delivered the President’s
message as forcefully as I could, then
tried to contain the consequences when
both sides reacted badly.
In June 2009, two important speeches
reshaped the diplomatic landscape.
First, in Cairo, President Obama offered
an ambitious and eloquent recalibration
of America’s relationship with the
Islamic world. In the wide-ranging
address, he reaffirmed his personal
commitment to pursue a two-state
solution that would meet the aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians. Before
the speech the President and I made time
to take a private tour of the city’s
cavernous Sultan Hassan Mosque, one of
the biggest in the world. We removed
our shoes, and I put on a headscarf as we
looked in wonder at the intricate
medieval craftsmanship and listened to
explanations from an Egyptian American
art historian. It was a lovely, quiet
moment together in the middle of all the
madness of a Presidential trip and a
major policy rollout. It made me smile
when later that day the President said in
his speech, “Islamic culture has given us
majestic arches and soaring spires;
timeless poetry and cherished music;
elegant calligraphy and places of
peaceful contemplation.”
Ten days later Bibi went to Bar-Ilan
University outside Tel Aviv and, while
he continued to reject a settlement
freeze, he endorsed the idea of the twostate solution for the first time. It seemed
like a seminal turn, that Netanyahu
wanted to be remembered as a leader
who could take bold risks and deliver a
historic deal.
Mitchell and I spent the summer and
early fall working with both the Israelis
and the Palestinians to break the logjam
over settlements. In fairness, we shared
responsibility for creating that logjam by
allowing the issue to turn into a test of
wills. President Obama decided that the
best way to move forward was to insist
that both leaders sit down with him
together when they were in New York
for the UN General Assembly in
September. These wouldn’t be formal
negotiations, but they would provide a
first opportunity for the leaders to talk to
each other and perhaps build some
momentum toward a more substantive
process. The meeting in New York was
awkward; both leaders were blunt about
their positions and showed little
willingness to compromise, especially
on the issue of settlements. “We all must
take risks for peace,” President Obama
told them. “It’s difficult to disentangle
ourselves from history, but we must do
so.”
We came out of New York with little
to show for the effort. But Mitchell and I
kept working on Netanyahu, and finally
he agreed to a partial halt on building
permits for future West Bank
settlements. We still had to sort out how
long the freeze would last and which
areas would be covered, but this was an
important start—and it was more than
any previous Israeli government had
been willing to do. The sticking point
would be Jerusalem. East Jerusalem had
been captured along with the West Bank
in 1967, and Palestinians dreamed of
one day establishing the capital of their
future state there. The Palestinians
therefore sought to halt construction in
East Jerusalem. That was a nonstarter
for Bibi, who refused to restrict building
in any part of Jerusalem.
In early October I spoke with Ehud
Barak, who was Netanyahu’s coalition
partner, as well as Minister of Defense
and the most important voice for peace
in the government. Barak was endlessly
optimistic, despite living in a region
where so much seemed to go wrong. He
was also one of the most decorated war
heroes in a nation of war heroes. As lore
has it, he even dressed in drag during a
daring commando assault into Beirut in
the 1980s. We got along famously. From
time to time he would call me and say,
“Hillary, let’s strategize,” and then
launch into a whirlwind of rapid-fire
ideas and arguments. He was eager to
help me reach an accommodation over
settlements that could move the process
forward. “We’ll be ready to listen, to be
sensitive and to be responsive,” he told
me. The Israelis eventually agreed to a
freeze on new construction in the West
Bank for ten months but held firm against
including Jerusalem.
I called Abbas to discuss the Israeli
offer. The initial Palestinian reaction
was to reject it out of hand as
inadequate, “worse than useless,” but I
thought this was the best deal they were
going to get and we should seize the
opportunity to move forward to direct
negotiations. “I want to stress to you
again, Mr. President, that our policy on
settlement activity is and will remain
unchanged,” I assured him, “and
although the Israeli settlement
moratorium as described to you by
George Mitchell will be significant and
will be an unprecedented step by any
Israeli government, it will not be a
substitute for Israel’s roadmap
commitments.” Abbas did not take issue
with my use of the word unprecedented,
but he wasn’t happy about the Jerusalem
exclusion or other limitations and did
not agree to enter negotiations.
To show his own good faith, though,
Abbas made a concession as well. He
offered that the Palestinians would delay
a vote at the United Nations on the
controversial Goldstone Report, which
accused Israel of war crimes during the
2008 war in Gaza. Abbas received swift
and sharp criticism for his decision from
across the Arab world, including
relentless personal attacks against him
on Al Jazeera, a satellite news network
owned by Qatar. Abbas was beside
himself and confided in me that he
feared for his safety and that of his
grandchildren, who had been harassed at
school. I thanked him for his “very
courageous and important decision,” but
I could tell he was starting to waver.
About a week later he reversed himself
and called for a UN vote on the
Goldstone Report. Later, in 2011,
Richard Goldstone himself retracted
some of the most inflammatory charges
in the report, including that the Israeli
military intentionally targeted civilians,
but the damage had been done.
At the end of October 2009 I was
intensely focused on getting the
proposed settlement moratorium in
place, in the hopes that it would clear
the way for direct negotiations between
the parties. I met with Abbas in Abu
Dhabi and then with Netanyahu in
Jerusalem. Standing next to Bibi at a
late-night press conference, I described
the construction freeze as
“unprecedented,” just as I had said to
Abbas. But this time my use of the word
caused outrage in Arab countries, where
people thought that I was being too
generous toward an offer that was
qualified, short term, and excluded East
Jerusalem. It was not the first time, nor
the last, that telling a hard truth would
cause me trouble.
Many in the region would later look
quite wistfully at that much-maligned
moratorium. But the immediate
imperative was to defuse the situation
and refocus the region on getting to
direct negotiations. Over the coming
days I did damage control in Morocco
and Egypt. In Cairo, I explained
privately to President Hosni Mubarak
and also in public that our official policy
on settlements had not changed. We still
opposed all construction and would
have preferred a longer, comprehensive
freeze. But I stood by my description of
the offer “to halt all new settlement
activities and to end the expropriation of
land, and to issue no permits or
approvals” as “unprecedented.” Because
the fact of the matter is, it was.
In late November the freeze went into
effect, and the clock started ticking. We
had ten months to move the parties
toward direct negotiations and a
comprehensive peace agreement.

One by one the months slipped by. As
promised, the Israelis halted new
settlement construction in the West Bank,
but the Palestinians held out for East
Jerusalem to be included and continued
to refuse to join direct negotiations,
although they did agree to what were
called “proximity talks,” with Mitchell
shuttling back and forth between the two
sides to discuss their vision for the
negotiations.
In March 2010, the Israelis managed
to make the Palestinian case for them
with an unnecessarily provocative act.
Vice President Biden was visiting Israel
on a goodwill tour, reaffirming the
administration’s strong support for the
country’s security and trying to put the
unpleasantness of our row over
settlements behind us. While he was still
on the ground, the Israeli Interior
Ministry announced plans for 1,600 new
housing units in East Jerusalem, a move
certain to inflame Palestinian
sensitivities. Netanyahu said that he had
nothing to do with the unfortunate timing
of the announcement, but it was taken by
many as a snub of the Vice President and
the United States.
Biden was, characteristically, eventempered about the whole kerfuffle. But
both President Obama and Rahm were
furious, and they asked me to make that
clear to Bibi. In a long and heated
telephone conversation, I told the Prime
Minister that President Obama viewed
the news about East Jerusalem “as a
personal insult to him, the Vice
President, and the United States.” Strong
stuff for a diplomatic conversation. I
didn’t enjoy playing the bad cop, but it
was part of the job. “Let me assure you
and the President that the timing was
entirely unintentional and unfortunate,”
he replied, but he refused to reverse the
decision.
By coincidence, this incident occurred
just before the annual conference in
Washington of the American Israel
Public Affairs Committee, a prominent
pro-Israel advocacy organization.
Netanyahu was scheduled to visit D.C.
and address the conference. It would be
up to me to represent the administration.
I went first. The big crowd gathered at
the Washington Convention Center was a
little wary at first. They had wanted to
hear how I would address the
controversy and if I’d keep up the
criticism of Netanyahu. I knew I had to
speak to that, but I also wanted to step
back and make the broader case for why
we viewed a negotiated peace
agreement as crucial to Israel’s future.
I talked about my own personal
devotion to Israel’s security and to the
two-state solution and explained our
concerns about the trends in
demography, technology, and ideology.
It was my most comprehensive public
argument to date as Secretary about why
the status quo was unsustainable and the
need for peace undeniable. Then I turned
to the contretemps over East Jerusalem.
Our objection was not based on
wounded pride, I said, or on any
judgment about the final status of East
Jerusalem, which would have to be
decided at the negotiating table. New
construction in East Jerusalem or the
West Bank would undermine the mutual
trust we needed to build between the
parties, expose daylight between Israel
and the United States that others in the
region might try to exploit, and diminish
America’s unique ability to play the role
of honest broker. “Our credibility in this
process depends in part on our
willingness to praise both sides when
they are courageous, and when we don’t
agree, to say so, and say so
unequivocally,” I said.
My speech helped cool some of the
tensions, at least in the room, but the
relationship between Netanyahu and
President Obama continued to
deteriorate. Later that afternoon I met
with Bibi for more than an hour at his
hotel. He told me he planned to come out
swinging in his speech to the conference
that evening, and he was as good as his
word. “Jerusalem is not a settlement—it
is our capital,” he declared defiantly.
(We had never referred to Jerusalem as
a settlement; our argument was that the
city’s final status should be determined
by good-faith negotiations, and building
new homes for Israelis in Palestinian
neighborhoods would not be helpful to
that end.) The next day Netanyahu had a
charged meeting with the President at the
White House. At one point during the
discussion, the President reportedly left
him waiting in the Roosevelt Room for
about an hour while he took care of other
matters. It was an unusual move, but one
that effectively telegraphed his
displeasure. One positive outcome of
this mini-crisis was that the Israelis got
a lot better about warning us before any
new, potentially controversial housing
projects were announced, and they
became much more sensitive about East
Jerusalem. At least while the ten-month
moratorium remained in place, there was
little if any additional construction there.
As if the tensions over settlements
weren’t enough, things went from bad to
worse at the end of May. Israeli
commandos raided a flotilla of ships
from Turkey carrying pro-Palestinian
activists trying to break the Israeli
blockade of Gaza. Nine Turkish citizens
were killed, including one American
with dual citizenship. I received an
urgent call from Ehud Barak while I was
marching in the Chappaqua Memorial
Day parade, one of my favorite annual
traditions in our small town. “We’re not
happy with the results, but we had to
make tough choices. We couldn’t avoid
it,” Ehud explained. “There will be
unforeseen repercussions,” I warned
him.
Turkey had long been one of Israel’s
only partners in the region, but in the
wake of this debacle, I had to convince
the enraged Turks not to take serious
actions against Israel in response. The
day after the raid Foreign Minister
Davutoğlu came to see me, and we
talked for more than two hours. He was
highly emotional and threatened that
Turkey might declare war on Israel.
“Psychologically, this attack is like 9/11
for Turkey,” he said, demanding an
Israeli apology and compensation for the
victims. “How can you not care?” he
asked me. “One of them was an
American citizen!” I did care—quite a
lot—but my first priority was to calm
him down and put aside all this talk of
war and consequences. Afterward I
advised President Obama to call Turkish
Prime Minister Erdoğan as well. Then I
relayed the Turkish concerns and
demands to Netanyahu. He said he
wanted to patch things up with Turkey
but refused to apologize publicly. (My
efforts to convince Bibi to apologize to
Turkey seesawed back and forth for the
remainder of my tenure. On several
occasions he told me he would finally
do it, only to be stopped by other
members of his center-right coalition. I
even enlisted Henry Kissinger to make
the strategic case to him in August 2011.
Finally, in March 2013, with a reelected
President Obama at his side during a
visit to Jerusalem, Bibi called Erdoğan
to apologize for “operational mistakes”
and to express regret for the
unintentional loss of life that resulted.
The Turks and Israelis are still working
to rebuild the trust lost in this incident.)
Back to the summer of 2010. With the
ten-month settlement freeze winding
down, we faced the urgency of getting
the parties back to the negotiating table.
Mitchell and I enlisted Jordan and Egypt
to pressure the Palestinians to relent on
their preconditions. President Obama
met with Abbas in June and announced a
major new aid package for the West
Bank and Gaza. Finally, in August,
Abbas agreed to attend direct
negotiations in Washington about all the
core issues of the conflict, so long as the
settlement moratorium remained in
place. If it expired as planned at the end
of September, he would walk away
again. An exasperated George Mitchell
asked Abbas, “How is it that something
which you described as worse than
useless eight months ago has now
become indispensable?” We all
understood that Abbas had to manage his
own difficult politics, both with his own
people and with the Arab states, but it
was frustrating nonetheless.
There was no way we were going to
resolve all the core issues in a single
month—Mitchell optimistically
suggested a one-year deadline for the
talks—but we hoped that we could build
enough momentum either to convince
Netanyahu to extend the freeze or
persuade Abbas to keep negotiating
without it. If we could make enough
progress on the question of final borders
for the two states, then that would
significantly ease the settlement issue
because it would be clear to everyone
which areas would ultimately stay with
Israel and which would go to the
Palestinians. It wasn’t going to be as
simple as just returning to the 1967
lines. The heavy growth of settlements
along the border had made that a
nonstarter. Land swaps could carve out
the settlement blocks and provide
Palestinians with a roughly equal amount
of land elsewhere. But, as always, the
devil would be in the details.

On the first day of September, President
Obama welcomed Netanyahu and Abbas
to the White House, along with King
Abdullah II of Jordan and President
Mubarak of Egypt. He hosted a small
working dinner in the Old Family Dining
Room. Tony Blair, the former British
Prime Minister, and I joined the group.
Blair served as a Special Envoy for the
Quartet, which was established in 2002
by the United Nations, the United States,
the European Union, and Russia to
coordinate diplomatic efforts on behalf
of Middle East peace. The seven of us
gathered around the dining-room table
beneath an elegant crystal chandelier in
the bright yellow room that was largely
unchanged from the days when I used to
host private meals there as First Lady.
Bibi and Abbas sat next to each other,
flanked by me and Blair, across from
President Obama, Mubarak, and the
King.
President Obama set the tone in
remarks before dinner, reminding the
leaders, “Each of you are the heirs of
peacemakers who dared greatly—Begin
and Sadat, Rabin and King Hussein—
statesmen who saw the world as it was
but also imagined the world as it should
be. It is the shoulders of our
predecessors upon which we stand. It is
their work that we carry on. Now, like
each of them, we must ask, do we have
the wisdom and the courage to walk the
path of peace?”
The atmosphere was warm, despite
the many difficult months that had led up
to this moment, but still cautious.
Everyone was aware of the time
pressure we faced, and no one wanted to
appear ungracious at President Obama’s
dinner table, yet their fundamental
disagreements were not easy to hide.
The next day the drama moved to the
State Department. I convened the leaders
and their negotiating teams in the ornate
Benjamin Franklin Room on the eighth
floor. It was time to roll up our sleeves
and see what we could accomplish. “By
being here today, you each have taken an
important step toward freeing your
peoples from the shackles of a history
we cannot change, and moving toward a
future of peace and dignity that only you
can create,” I told Netanyahu and Abbas.
“The core issues at the center of these
negotiations—territory, security,
Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, and
others—will get no easier if we wait.
Nor will they resolve themselves. . . .
This is a time for bold leadership and a
time for statesmen who have the courage
to make difficult decisions.” Sitting on
either side of me, Netanyahu and Abbas
sounded ready to accept the challenge.
Bibi invoked the biblical story of
Isaac (father of the Jews) and Ishmael
(father of the Arabs), the two sons of
Abraham who, despite their differences,
came together to bury their father. “I can
only pray, and I know that millions
around the world, millions of Israelis
and millions of Palestinians and many
other millions around the world, pray
that the pain that we have experienced—
you and us—in the last hundred years of
conflict will unite us not only in a
moment of peace around a table of peace
here in Washington, but will enable us to
leave from here and to forge a durable,
lasting peace for generations.”
Abbas reminisced about the famous
handshake in 1993 between Rabin and
Arafat and spoke of reaching “a peace
that will end the conflict, that will meet
all the demands, and start a new era
between the Israeli and the Palestinian
people.” The gaps we had to overcome
were substantial and time was running
short, but at least everyone was saying
the right things.
After a long afternoon of formal
negotiations, I invited the two leaders to
my office on the seventh floor. Senator
Mitchell and I talked with them for a
while, and then we left them alone. They
sat in two high-backed chairs in front of
the fireplace and agreed to meet again
face-to-face in two weeks. We hadn’t
made much substantive progress, but I
was encouraged by both their words and
their body language. It was a moment of
optimism and ambition that, sadly,
would not be matched by action.
Two weeks later we reconvened in
Sharm el-Sheikh, a sun-soaked Egyptian
resort town on the Red Sea. (One of the
ironies of international diplomacy is that
we often travel to places like Sharm or
Bali or Hawaii but then have no time at
all to enjoy them, or even venture
outside the formal conference rooms. I
sometimes felt like Tantalus, the hungry
wretch of Greek mythology doomed to
stare at delicious fruit and refreshing
water for all eternity but never able to
taste it.) This time our host was
President Mubarak, who, despite being
an autocrat at home, was a steadfast
proponent of the two-state solution and
peace in the Middle East. Because Egypt
shared borders with Gaza and Israel,
and was the first Arab country to sign a
peace agreement with Israel, back in
1979, its role was crucial. Mubarak had
a close relationship with Abbas and
helped get the Palestinians to the table in
the first place. Now I hoped he could
help keep them there.
Mubarak and I began the day by
meeting separately with the Israelis and
the Palestinians. Then we brought
Netanyahu and Abbas together, and they
talked for an hour and forty minutes.
Both sides reaffirmed their intention to
participate in good faith and with
seriousness of purpose. Then we started
drilling down on some of the core issues
of the conflict. It was slow going—there
was a lot of positioning, posturing, and
taking the measure of the other side—but
it felt good to finally be talking about the
heart of the matter. After more than
twenty months of false starts, we were
engaging with the key questions that held
out the promise of ending the conflict
once and for all. After a lunch for all of
us, we decided to meet again, and
Netanyahu delayed his departure so we
could keep talking.
The next day the conversation
continued at Netanyahu’s home in
Jerusalem, where he displayed the
Palestinian flag as a sign of respect to
Abbas. Beit Aghion, the Prime
Minister’s official residence, was built
by a wealthy merchant in the 1930s and
served as a hospital for fighters in the
1948 Arab-Israeli War. It sits on a quiet,
partially closed-off street in the well-todo neighborhood of Rehavia. Outside,
its façade is covered with Jerusalem
limestone, like the Western Wall and
much of the Old City. Inside it is
surprisingly cozy. The four of us—
Netanyahu, Abbas, Mitchell, and I—
crammed into the Prime Minister’s
personal study for intense discussions. In
the back of everyone’s mind was the
approaching deadline; the settlement
freeze would expire and the talks would
collapse in less than two weeks if we
didn’t find a way forward. The ticking of
this clock was deafening.
Among other tough questions, our
discussion focused on how long the
Israeli military would maintain a
presence in the Jordan Valley, which
would become the border between
Jordan and a future Palestinian state.
Mitchell and I offered suggestions about
how to reconcile the continuing needs of
Israeli security with Palestinian
sovereignty. Netanyahu insisted that
Israeli troops remain along the border
for many decades without a fixed date
for withdrawal so future decisions could
be based on conditions on the ground. At
one point Abbas said that he could live
with an Israeli military deployment in
the Jordan Valley for a few years
beyond the establishment of a new state,
but no longer and it had to be a set
period of time, not an open-ended stay.
Despite the obvious disagreement, I
thought that was a potentially significant
opening; if the conversation was about
years, not decades or months, then
perhaps the right mix of international
security support and advanced border
protection tactics and technologies could
bridge the gap, if we could keep the
talks going.
They debated back and forth as the
hours went by. Outside, the American
press corps grew restless, and many of
the journalists decamped to a nearby
hotel bar. Inside, I was frustrated that we
weren’t making the kind of progress I
knew would be needed to survive the
end of the settlement freeze. But
Mitchell, the veteran of the interminable
Northern Ireland negotiations, offered
some helpful perspective. “The
negotiations there lasted for twenty-two
months,” he observed. “And it was
many, many months into the process
before there was a single, serious,
substantive discussion on the major
issues that separated the parties.” Here
we were already deep into the most
difficult and sensitive issues of the
conflict.
After the meeting finally broke up,
nearly three hours later, I stayed behind
to talk to Netanyahu alone. Surely he
didn’t want to be responsible for halting
these talks now that they were under way
and delving into the core issues. Could
he agree to a brief extension of the
moratorium to allow us to press ahead
and see what could be achieved? The
Prime Minister shook his head. He had
given ten months, and the Palestinians
had wasted nine of them. He was ready
to keep talking, but the settlement freeze
would end on schedule.
That night in Jerusalem was the last
time Netanyahu and Abbas would sit and
talk face-to-face. As of this writing,
despite intensive efforts between the
parties in 2013 and 2014, there has not
yet been another session between the
two leaders.
Over the following weeks we launched a
full-court press to persuade Bibi to
reconsider extending the freeze. Much of
the action played out in New York,
where everyone had gathered once again
for the UN General Assembly. The year
before, President Obama had hosted the
first direct meeting between Netanyahu
and Abbas. Now we were fighting to
forestall total collapse of the
negotiations. There were long nights at
the Waldorf Astoria hotel, strategizing
with President Obama and our team and
then working with the Israelis, the
Palestinians, and the Arabs to try to find
a solution. I met with Abbas twice, had a
private meeting with Ehud Barak, had
breakfast with a group of Arab Foreign
Ministers, and spoke with Bibi by
phone, each time making the case that
walking away from the talks, settlement
freeze or no, would only set back the
aspirations of the Palestinian people.
In his speech to the General
Assembly, President Obama called for
the moratorium to be extended, and he
urged both sides to stay at the table and
keep talking: “Now is the time for the
parties to help each other overcome this
obstacle. Now is the time to build the
trust—and provide the time—for
substantial progress to be made. Now is
the time for this opportunity to be seized,
so that it does not slip away.”
After the initial stonewalling, it
appeared that Netanyahu was willing to
discuss the idea of an extension, but only
if we met an ever-expanding list of
demands that included providing new
state-of-the-art fighter planes. For his
part, Abbas insisted that Israel had to
“choose between peace and the
continuation of settlements.”
On the night before the deadline, I
reminded Ehud Barak that “the collapse
of the moratorium would be a disaster
for Israel and the United States.” Also
for the Palestinians, he replied. Barak
did everything he could to help me work
out a compromise, but he was never able
to bring Netanyahu or the rest of the
Israeli Cabinet along.
The deadline came and went. Direct
negotiations were over, for now. But my
work wasn’t. I thought it was crucial that
we not allow the collapse of talks to
lead to a collapse of public confidence
—or to violence, as had happened in the
past. Over the final months of 2010, I
threw myself into efforts to keep both
sides from doing anything provocative
and to explore whether we could close
some of the gaps revealed in our
negotiating sessions through proximity
talks and creative diplomatic proposals.
“I’m increasingly worried about the way
ahead,” I told Netanyahu in a call in
early October. “We’re trying very hard
to keep things on track and avoid any
precipitous collapse. You know how
disappointed we are we couldn’t avoid
an end to the moratorium.” I urged him to
show restraint when approving new
construction or talking about future
plans. Reckless talk would only inflame
a tense situation. Bibi promised to be
judicious, but warned me against
allowing the Palestinians to “play
brinksmanship.”
Abbas, always worried about his
precarious standing with the divided
Palestinian public and his Arab patrons,
was searching for a way to restore his
credibility, which took a hit with the end
of the settlement freeze. One idea he was
considering was to go to the United
Nations and ask for statehood. That
would be an end-run around negotiations
and put the United States in a difficult
position. We would feel obligated to
veto the issue in the Security Council,
but a vote might expose how isolated
Israel had become. “I know you’re fed
up, Mr. President, and I’m sure you
wonder if what we are trying to do now
will lead anywhere,” I told Abbas. “I
would not be calling you if I didn’t think
what we are doing had a chance of
succeeding for us as partners. We are
working tirelessly and as you have said
yourself, there is no alternative path to
peace, but through negotiations.” He was
in a corner and didn’t know how to get
out of it, but this was a predicament of
his and our own making.
In my calls and meetings with the
leaders, I probed to see if we could
narrow the gaps on territory and borders
enough to move beyond the settlement
issue. I told Netanyahu in mid-October,
“The question is, assuming your needs
on security are met: What could you
offer Abu Mazen on borders? I need to
know this with some specificity because
the Palestinians know the ballpark.”
Netanyahu responded, “What concerns
me is not Abu Mazen’s territorial
demands, but his understanding and
acceptance of my security needs. . . . I’m
a realist. I know what’s needed to close
the deal.” Our call went on like this for
an hour and twenty minutes.
In November I spent eight hours with
Netanyahu at the Regency Hotel in New
York City. It was my longest single
bilateral meeting as Secretary. We
talked everything over, again and again,
including the old ideas for restarting a
settlement moratorium in exchange for
military hardware and other security
assistance. Eventually he agreed on a
proposal to bring to his Cabinet that
would halt construction in the West Bank
(but not East Jerusalem) for ninety days.
In exchange, we pledged a $3 billion
security package and promised to veto
any resolutions at the UN that would
undercut direct negotiations between the
parties.
When news of the deal became
public, it caused consternation on all
sides. Netanyahu’s right-wing coalition
partners were irate, and to placate them,
he emphasized that construction would
continue in East Jerusalem. This, in turn,
set off the Palestinians. Some in the
United States also raised fair questions
about whether it was wise to buy a
ninety-day freeze for negotiations that
might well lead nowhere. I wasn’t happy
either—I confided to Tony Blair that I
found it to be “a nasty business”—but it
felt like a sacrifice worth making.
Under all this pressure, however, the
deal started to unravel almost
immediately, and by the end of
November it was effectively dead. In
December 2010, I spoke at the Saban
Forum, a conference that brings together
leaders and experts from across the
Middle East and the United States. I
pledged that America would stay
engaged and keep pressing both sides to
grapple with the core issues, even if it
was through a return to “proximity
talks.” We would push both the Israelis
and the Palestinians to lay out their
positions on the toughest questions with
real specificity, and then we would
work to narrow the gaps, including by
offering our own ideas and bridging
proposals when appropriate. Since my
husband put forward the “Clinton
Parameters” a decade before, the United
States had been reluctant to push any
specific plans or even a substantive
framework. “Peace cannot be imposed
from outside,” was a frequent saying,
and true. But now we would be more
aggressive in setting the terms of the
debate.
President Obama followed through on
this commitment in the spring of 2011 by
declaring in a speech at the State
Department, “We believe the borders of
Israel and Palestine should be based on
the 1967 lines with mutually agreed
swaps, so that secure and recognized
borders are established for both states.”
Netanyahu unhelpfully chose to focus
on the reference to “1967 lines” and
ignore the “agreed swaps,” and another
highly personal standoff between the two
heads of state resulted. The Palestinians,
meanwhile, escalated their plan to
petition the United Nations for
statehood. George Mitchell stepped
down that summer, and I spent much of
the rest of 2011 trying to keep the
situation from deteriorating from
deadlock into disaster.
It wasn’t easy. By then Hosni
Mubarak, the most prominent champion
for peace among the Arab states, had
fallen from power in Egypt. Unrest was
spreading across the region. Israelis
faced a new and unpredictable strategic
landscape. Some Palestinians wondered
if they should be protesting in the streets
like the Tunisians, Egyptians, and
Libyans. The prospects for a return to
serious negotiations seemed further
away than ever. A window of
opportunity that had opened with the
inauguration of President Obama in early
2009 seemed to be closing.
Throughout those difficult days I often
thought back to our long discussions in
Washington, Sharm el-Sheikh, and
Jerusalem. I hoped that one day the
constituencies for peace among both
peoples would grow so strong and loud
that their leaders would be forced to
compromise. In my head I heard the deep
and steady voice of my slain friend
Yitzhak Rabin: “The coldest peace is
better than the warmest war.”
15

The Arab Spring:
Revolution

They’re sitting on a powder keg and if
they don’t change, it’s going to explode.”
I was exasperated. It was the first week
of January 2011, and we were planning
another trip to the Middle East. This
time I wanted to go beyond the usual
agenda of official meetings and private
cajoling about needed political and
economic reforms in the Arab world.
Jeff Feltman, Assistant Secretary for
Near Eastern Affairs, my top advisor on
the region, agreed. Trying to drive
change in the Middle East could feel like
banging your head against a brick wall,
and Jeff had been doing it for years,
under several administrations. Among
other roles, he had served as
Ambassador to Lebanon during some of
its most tumultuous recent history,
including the assassination of Prime
Minister Rafic Hariri in 2005 that
triggered the Cedar Revolution and the
withdrawal of Syrian troops, as well as
the war between Israel and Hezbollah in
2006. These experiences would serve
Jeff well in the weeks to come as we
tried to stay one step ahead of a wave of
upheaval that would sweep the region.
The period ahead would be fluid and
confusing even for experienced
diplomats.
I turned to two of my speechwriters,
Megan Rooney and Dan Schwerin. “I’m
tired of repeating the same old things
every time I go there,” I told them. “I
want to say something that really breaks
through this time.” The upcoming annual
Forum for the Future conference in
Doha, the capital of energy-rich Qatar,
would provide an opportunity for me to
deliver a message to many of the Middle
East’s most influential royals, political
leaders, business tycoons, academics,
and civil society activists. Many of them
would be gathered in the same room at
the same time. If I wanted to make the
case that the region’s status quo was
unsustainable, this was the place to do it.
I told Megan and Dan to get to work.
Of course, I was not the first
American official to push for reform. In
2005, Secretary of State Condoleezza
Rice went to Egypt and made a
remarkable admission: for more than
half a century, the United States had
chosen to pursue “stability at the
expense of democracy” and “achieved
neither.” That would be true no longer,
she promised. Four years later in
President Obama’s major speech in
Cairo, he too called for democratic
reforms.
Yet for all the words delivered in
public and even more pointed words in
private, and despite the persistent efforts
of people from all walks of life to make
their countries more prosperous and
free, by early 2011, much of the Middle
East and North Africa remained locked
in political and economic stagnation.
Many countries had been ruled for
decades under martial law. Across the
region corruption at every level,
especially at the top, was rampant.
Political parties and civil society groups
were nonexistent or tightly restricted;
judicial systems were far from free or
independent; and elections, when they
were held, were often rigged. This sorry
state of affairs was dramatized anew in
November 2010, when Egypt held
flawed Parliamentary elections that
nearly eliminated the token political
opposition.
A landmark study published in 2002
by leading Middle Eastern scholars and
the United Nations Development
Program was as troubling as it was
revealing. The Arab Human
Development Report painted a
devastating portrait of a region in
decline. Despite the Middle East’s oil
wealth and strategic trading location,
unemployment was more than double the
global average, and even higher for
women and young people. A growing
number of Arabs lived in poverty,
crowded into slums without sanitation,
safe water, or reliable electricity, while
a small elite gained increasing control
over land and resources. It was also not
surprising that Arab women’s political
and economic participation was the
lowest in the world.
Despite its problems, most of the
region’s leaders and power brokers
seemed largely content to carry on as
they always had. And despite the best
intentions of successive American
administrations, the day-to-day reality of
U.S. foreign policy prioritized urgent
strategic and security imperatives such
as counterterrorism, support for Israel,
and blocking Iran’s nuclear ambitions
over the long-term goal of encouraging
internal reforms in our Arab partners. To
be sure, we did press leaders to reform,
because we believed that would
eventually provide greater long-term
stability and inclusive prosperity. But
we also worked with them on a wide
range of security concerns and never
seriously considered cutting off our
military relationships with them.
This was a dilemma that had
confronted generations of American
policymakers. It’s easy to give speeches
and write books about standing up for
democratic values, even when it may
conflict with our security interests, but
when confronted with the actual, realworld trade-offs, choices get a lot
harder. Inevitably, making policy is a
balancing act. Hopefully we get it more
right than wrong. But there are always
choices we regret, consequences we do
not foresee, and alternate paths we wish
we had taken.
I talked with enough Arab leaders
over the years to know that for many of
them, it wasn’t a simple matter of being
content with how things were; they
accepted that change would come but
only slowly. I looked for ways to build
personal relationships and trust with
them, to better grasp the cultural and
social views that influenced their
actions, and, when possible, push for
more rapid change.
All of this was on my mind as 2011
dawned and I prepared once again to
visit the Middle East. I had spent much
of 2009 and 2010 working with
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and
King Abdullah II of Jordan to bring the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders together
for direct peace talks, only to see them
fall apart after three rounds of
substantive negotiations. Time and again
I had told both sides that the status quo
was unsustainable and that they needed
to make the necessary choices that
would lead to peace and progress. Now
I was thinking the same thing about the
entire region. If Arab leaders, many of
whom were America’s partners, failed
to embrace the need for change, they
risked losing control of their
increasingly young and alienated
populations and opening the door to
unrest, conflict, and terrorists. That’s the
argument I wanted to make, without too
many of the usual diplomatic niceties
diluting the message.
As we planned a trip around the theme
of economic, political, and
environmental sustainability, events
unfolded on the ground that raised the
stakes even higher.
The pro-Western government in
Lebanon was teetering on the verge of
collapse under intense pressure from
Hezbollah, a heavily armed Shiite
militia with significant influence in
Lebanese politics. On January 7, I flew
to New York to discuss the crisis with
Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri,
the son of the assassinated former
leader, Rafic Hariri; and King Abdullah
of Saudi Arabia, both of whom were
visiting the United States.
At the same time, reports were
coming in of street protests in Tunisia, a
former French colony on the
Mediterranean coast of North Africa
between Libya and Algeria that had been
ruled for decades by the dictator Zine el
Abidine Ben Ali. For the many European
tourists who flocked to its beaches and
cosmopolitan hotels, it was easy to
ignore the dark side of Ben Ali’s
Tunisia. Women enjoyed more rights
there than in many other Middle Eastern
nations, the economy was more
diversified, and extremists were not
welcome. But the regime was ruthless,
repressive, and corrupt, and beyond the
glitzy tourist destinations, many people
lived in poverty and despair.
The unrest had begun with a single
heartbreaking incident on December 17,
2010. A twenty-six-year-old Tunisian
man named Mohamed Bouazizi was
selling fruit from a small cart in Sidi
Bouzid, a poor provincial city south of
the capital, Tunis. Like so many others in
Tunisia, he was part of the underground
economy and struggled to make enough
money to provide for his family.
Bouazizi did not have an official permit
to sell his produce, and on that day he
had an altercation with a female police
officer that left him humiliated and
desperate. Later that day he set himself
on fire in front of the local government
offices. That act galvanized protests
across Tunisia. People took to the
streets, protesting corruption, indignity,
and lack of opportunity. On social media
they passed around lurid tales of Ben
Ali’s corruption, some derived from
reports by U.S. diplomats about the
regime’s excesses over the years, which
had been released by WikiLeaks not
long before the protests began.
The regime responded to the protests
with excessive force, which only fueled
public outrage. Ben Ali himself visited
Bouazizi in the hospital, but the gesture
did little to quell the growing unrest, and
the young man died a few days later.
On January 9, as I flew from
Washington to Abu Dhabi for the start of
my trip, which would take me from the
United Arab Emirates (UAE) to Yemen,
Oman, and Qatar, security forces in
Tunisia intensified their crackdown on
protesters. Several people were killed.
Most observers saw it as yet another
example of a familiar cycle of
repression in a region that had become
numb to such convulsions.
The UAE is a tiny but influential
Persian Gulf nation that has grown
exceedingly wealthy because of its
extensive oil and natural gas reserves.
The government, under the leadership of
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed Al
Nahyan, was investing in solar power as
a way of diversifying its economy and
hedging against future volatility in the
global oil market, a rare instance of
foresight and smart planning in a
petrostate. At the high-tech Masdar
Institute in the desert about twenty miles
outside of Abu Dhabi, I spoke to a group
of graduate students about the region’s
shrinking oil supplies and declining
water tables. “The old strategies for
growth and prosperity will no longer
work,” I said. “For too many people in
too many places, the status quo today is
unsustainable.”
No place in the region seemed to
represent my warnings better than
Yemen, at the foot of the Arabian
Peninsula. The contrast between its
dusty and medieval capital, Sanaa, and
the sleek and modern UAE cities of Abu
Dhabi and Dubai could not have been
starker. Yemen, a tribal society that had
been ruled since 1990 by a strongman
named Ali Abdullah Saleh, was plagued
by violent separatist insurgencies, an
influx of al Qaeda–linked terrorists,
widespread unemployment, dwindling
water supplies, dreadful child survival
statistics, and, counterintuitively, a
surging population that was expected to
double in the next twenty years. Yemen’s
population is one of the most heavily
armed and least literate on earth.
America’s relationship with President
Saleh was emblematic of the dilemma at
the heart of our Middle East policy. He
was corrupt and autocratic, but he was
also committed to fighting al Qaeda and
keeping his fractious country together.
The Obama Administration decided to
hold our noses, increase our military and
development aid to Yemen, and expand
our counterterrorism cooperation. Over
a long lunch at his palace, I talked with
Saleh about how we could work more
closely together on security. I also
pressed him on human rights and
economic reforms. He was not so much
interested in hearing that as he was in
showing me the antique rifle that had
been a gift from General Norman
Schwarzkopf. He was also adamant that
I see the Old City of Sanaa before
leaving and insisted that I take a tour.
The Old City is right out of the
Arabian Nights, a jumble of mud-brick
buildings whose façades are covered
with decorative alabaster work, almost
like gingerbread houses. Crowds of
curious onlookers watched from spice
shops and cafés as we passed. Most of
the women wore veils, either
headscarves called hijab or the more
extensive face coverings called niqab.
The men wore large curved daggers at
their belts, and quite a few carried
Kalashnikov rifles. Many of the men
were chewing khat leaves, the Yemeni
narcotic of choice. I was in a wide
armored SUV that could barely fit
through the narrow streets. The car came
so close to some of the walls of the
shops and houses that if the windows
had been open, I could have reached
inside.
My destination was the Mövenpick
Hotel, which sits on a rise overlooking
the city, where I met with a large group
of activists and students, part of
Yemen’s vibrant civil society. I opened
our meeting with a message intended not
just for Yemenis but for people across
the Middle East. “The next generation of
Yemenis will be hungry for jobs, health
care, literacy, education and training that
connect them to the global economy, and
they will be seeking responsive
democratic governance that reaches and
serves their communities.” The entire
region had to figure out how to offer
young people a vision for a future of
opportunity resting on a foundation of
stability and security. My remarks set off
an energetic exchange of ideas and
venting by the crowd. Students who had
studied abroad spoke passionately about
why they had returned home to help
build their country. Despite their
frustration over repression and
corruption, they were still hopeful that
progress was possible.
One young woman in the crowd was
named Nujood Ali, who successfully
fought for a divorce at age ten. She had
been forced to marry a man three times
her age who had made her drop out of
school. This wasn’t uncommon in
Yemen, but to Nujood, it felt like a
prison sentence. Desperate to escape
what quickly became an abusive
marriage and to reclaim her dream of an
education and an independent life, she
boarded a bus and made it to the local
courthouse. Everyone towered above her
and paid no attention until a judge asked
the young girl why she was there.
Nujood said she wanted a divorce. A
lawyer named Shada Nasser came to her
rescue. Together they shocked Yemen
and the world by fighting in court—and
winning. I suggested that Nujood’s story
should inspire Yemen to end child
marriage once and for all.
The next day provided more contrasts
when I went on to Oman, whose ruler,
Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said, had
made wiser choices over the years that
helped his country build a modern
society while remaining true to its
culture and traditions. “Let there be
learning, even under the shade of trees,”
he had proclaimed. In the 1970s the
entire country had three primary schools,
which educated fewer than a thousand
boys and no girls. In 2014, Oman has
universal primary education, and more
women than men graduate from the
country’s universities. Oman is a
monarchy, not a democracy, but it has
shown what is possible when a leader
focuses on education, empowers women
and girls, and puts people at the center
of its development strategy. In 2010, the
UN Development Programme ranked
Oman as the world’s most improved
country in human development since
1970.
That same day, January 12, as
Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri was in
Washington preparing to meet with
President Obama, his government fell
apart amid factional infighting, a curse
stalking every Lebanese government that
has tried to balance the interests and
agendas of its mixed citizenry of Sunnis,
Shiites, Christians, and Druze.
Meanwhile violence was escalating on
the streets of Tunisia. It didn’t feel like a
full-blown crisis yet, but there was
definitely a sense that the region was
starting to shake.
My final stop was Doha, Qatar, for
the speech to the regional conference
that we had been working on so intently.
Early on the morning of January 13, I
walked into a crowded meeting room
full of Arab leaders and outlined the
region’s challenges as bluntly as I could:
unemployment, corruption, a sclerotic
political order that denied citizens their
dignity and universal human rights. “In
too many places, in too many ways, the
region’s foundations are sinking into the
sand,” I said, echoing the themes I had
highlighted over the course of the trip.
Offering a direct challenge to the
assembled leaders, I continued, “You
can help build a future that your young
people will believe in, stay for, and
defend.” If not, “those who cling to the
status quo may be able to hold back the
full impact of their countries’ problems
for a little while, but not forever.”
Few Arab leaders are accustomed to
hearing criticism delivered publicly and
directly. Although I understood their
feelings and customs, I thought it
important that they take seriously how
quickly the world was changing around
them. If I had to be a little undiplomatic
to do that, so be it. “Let us face honestly
that future. Let us discuss openly what
needs to be done. Let us use this time to
move beyond rhetoric, to put away plans
that are timid and gradual, and make a
commitment to keep this region moving
in the right direction,” I said in closing.
After I was finished the American
journalists traveling with me were
buzzing about how blunt my words had
been. I wondered if any actions would
follow.
The next day, with demonstrations in
Tunisia swelling, Ben Ali fled the
country and sought refuge in Saudi
Arabia. Protests that had begun with a
dispute over a fruit cart had grown into a
full-fledged revolution. I had not
expected events to underscore my
“sinking into the sand” warning so
quickly or dramatically, but now the
message was undeniable. Yet as
significant as these events were, none of
us expected what happened next.
The protests in Tunisia proved
contagious. Thanks to satellite television
and social media, young people across
the Middle East and North Africa had a
front-row seat to the popular uprising
that toppled Ben Ali. Emboldened, they
began turning private criticisms of their
governments into public calls for
change. After all, many of the same
conditions that drove frustration in
Tunisia were present across the region,
especially with regard to corruption and
repression.
On January 25, protests in Cairo
against police brutality grew into
massive demonstrations against the
authoritarian regime of Hosni Mubarak.
Tens of thousands of Egyptians occupied
Tahrir Square in the heart of the city and
resisted efforts by the police to force
them to disperse. Day after day the
crowds in the square grew, and they
became focused on a single goal: driving
Mubarak from power.
I had known Mubarak and his wife,
Suzanne, for nearly twenty years. He
was a career Air Force officer who had
risen through the ranks to become Vice
President under Anwar Sadat, the
Egyptian ruler who fought the Yom
Kippur War with Israel in 1973 and
later signed the Camp David Accords.
Mubarak was injured in the extremist
attack that assassinated Sadat in 1981,
but he survived, became President, and
cracked down hard on Islamists and
other dissidents. He ruled Egypt like a
pharaoh with nearly absolute power for
the next three decades.
Over the years I spent time with
Mubarak. I appreciated his consistent
support for the Camp David Accords
and a two-state solution for Israelis and
Palestinians. He tried harder than any
other Arab leader to convince Yasser
Arafat to accept the peace agreement
negotiated by my husband in 2000. But,
despite his partnership with the United
States on key strategic matters, it was
disappointing that after so many years in
power his regime still denied the
Egyptian people many of their
fundamental freedoms and human rights
and was badly mismanaging the
economy. Under Mubarak’s rule, a
country known to historians as the
“breadbasket of antiquity” struggled to
feed its own people and became the
world’s largest importer of wheat.
In May 2009, Mubarak’s twelve-yearold grandson died suddenly from an
undisclosed health problem. The loss
seemed to shatter the aging leader. When
I called Suzanne Mubarak to offer my
sympathy, she told me the boy had been
“the President’s best friend.”
For the Obama Administration, the
protests in Egypt presented a delicate
situation. Mubarak had been a key
strategic ally for decades, yet America’s
ideals were more naturally aligned with
the young people calling for “bread,
freedom, and dignity.” When asked by a
journalist about the protests on that first
day, I sought to offer a measured
response that reflected our interests and
values, as well as the uncertainty of the
situation, and avoided throwing further
fuel on the fire. “We support the
fundamental right of expression and
assembly for all people, and we urge
that all parties exercise restraint and
refrain from violence,” I said. “But our
assessment is that the Egyptian
Government is stable and is looking for
ways to respond to the legitimate needs
and interests of the Egyptian people.” It
would turn out that the regime was
certainly not “stable,” but few observers
could have predicted just how fragile it
actually was.
On January 28, President Obama
joined a meeting of the national security
team in the White House Situation Room
and asked us for recommendations about
how to handle events in Egypt. The
debate around the long table went back
and forth. We delved once more into
questions that had bedeviled U.S.
policymakers for generations: How
should we balance strategic interests
against core values? Can we
successfully influence the internal
politics of other nations and nurture
democracy where it has never flowered
before, without incurring negative
unintended consequences? What does it
mean to be on the right side of history?
These were debates we would have
throughout the so-called Arab Spring.
Like many other young people around
the world, some of President Obama’s
aides in the White House were swept up
in the drama and idealism of the moment
as they watched the pictures from Tahrir
Square on television. They identified
with the democratic yearnings and
technological savvy of the young
Egyptian protesters. Indeed Americans
of all ages and political stripe were
moved by the sight of people so long
repressed finally demanding their
universal human rights, and repulsed by
the excessive force the authorities used
in response. I shared that feeling. It was
a thrilling moment. But along with Vice
President Biden, Secretary of Defense
Bob Gates, and National Security
Advisor Tom Donilon, I was concerned
that we not be seen as pushing a
longtime partner out the door, leaving
Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the region to
an uncertain, dangerous future.
The arguments for throwing
America’s weight behind the protesters
went beyond idealism. Championing
democracy and human rights had been at
the heart of our global leadership for
more than half a century. Yes, we had
from time to time compromised those
values in the service of strategic and
security interests, including by
supporting unsavory anti-Communist
dictators during the Cold War, with
mixed results. But such compromises
were harder to sustain in the face of the
Egyptian people demanding the very
rights and opportunities we had always
said they and all peoples deserved.
While before it had been possible to
focus on the Mubarak who supported
peace and cooperation with Israel and
hunted terrorists, now it was impossible
to ignore the reality that he was also a
heavy-handed autocrat who presided
over a corrupt and calcified regime.
And yet many of the same national
security interests that had led every
previous administration to maintain
close ties with Mubarak remained urgent
priorities. Iran was still attempting to
build a nuclear arsenal. Al Qaeda was
still plotting new attacks. The Suez
Canal remained a vital trade route.
Israel’s security was as essential as
ever. Mubarak had been a partner in all
these areas, despite anti-American and
anti-Israeli sentiments among his own
people. His Egypt served as a linchpin
of peace in a volatile region. Were we
really ready to walk away from that
relationship after thirty years of
cooperation?
Even if we did decide that was the
right choice, it was far from clear how
much influence we could actually have
on events on the ground. Contrary to
popular belief among many in the
Middle East, the United States has never
been an all-powerful puppet master able
to achieve any outcome we desire. What
if we called for Mubarak to step down,
but then he refused and managed to stay
in power? What if he did step down and
was succeeded by a lengthy period of
dangerous disorder or by a successor
government no more democratic and
actively opposed to our interests and
security? Either way, our relationship
would never be the same and our
influence in the region would erode.
Other partners would see how we
treated Mubarak and lose trust and
confidence in their relationships with us.
Historically, transitions from
dictatorship to democracy are fraught
with challenges and can easily go
terribly wrong. In Iran in 1979, for
example, extremists hijacked the broadbased popular revolution against the
Shah and established a brutal theocracy.
If something similar happened in Egypt,
it would be a catastrophe, for the people
of Egypt as well as for Israeli and U.S.
interests.
Despite the size of the protests in
Tahrir Square, they were largely
leaderless, driven by social media and
word of mouth rather than a coherent
opposition movement. After years of
one-party rule, Egypt’s protesters were
ill prepared to contest open elections or
build credible democratic institutions.
By contrast, the Muslim Brotherhood, an
eighty-year-old Islamist organization,
was well positioned to fill a vacuum if
the regime fell. Mubarak had driven the
Brotherhood underground, but it had
followers all over the country and a
tightly organized power structure. The
group had renounced violence and made
some efforts to appear more moderate.
But it was impossible to know how it
would behave and what would happen if
it gained control.
These arguments gave me pause.
Along with the Vice President, Gates,
and Donilon, I counseled caution. If
Mubarak falls, I told the President, “it
all may work out fine in twenty-five
years, but I think the period between
now and then will be quite rocky for the
Egyptian people, for the region, and for
us.” But I knew the President wasn’t
comfortable sitting by and doing nothing
while peaceful protesters were beaten
and killed in the streets. He needed a
path forward that urged Egypt toward
democracy but avoided the chaos of an
abrupt regime collapse.
On Meet the Press on Sunday,
January 30, I tried to set out a
sustainable approach. “Long-term
stability rests on responding to the
legitimate needs of the Egyptian people,
and that is what we want to see happen,”
so I said that we hoped to see a
“peaceful, orderly transition to a
democratic regime.” My using the word
orderly rather than immediate was
intentional, although unpopular in some
quarters of the White House. Some on
the President’s team wanted me to at
least foreshadow Mubarak’s departure,
if not call for it. I, however, thought it
was crucial that the rhetoric from me and
others in the administration help Egypt
achieve the reforms most of the
protesters sought with a soft landing
rather than a hard thud.
When I spoke with Egyptian Foreign
Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit that week,
I urged the government to show restraint
and demonstrate that it would be
responsive to the demands of the people.
“It’s going to be challenging for
President Mubarak to make the case that
he’s heard people after thirty years
unless he holds free and fair elections
and doesn’t try to engineer his
successor,” I told Aboul Gheit. “That is
not tomorrow’s business,” he responded.
“Tomorrow’s business is to pacify the
people and settle them down.” But he
agreed to pass along my concerns.
Mubarak, however, wasn’t listening.
Even as unrest escalated and the
regime’s control of the country appeared
to be slipping, he delivered a defiant
speech late on the evening of January 29
in which he fired many of his Cabinet
Ministers but refused to resign or limit
his own term in office.
I recommended to President Obama
that he dispatch an envoy to talk with
Mubarak in person and persuade him to
announce a strong package of reforms,
including an end to the country’s
repressive emergency law that had been
in effect since 1981, a pledge not to run
in the elections already planned for
September, and an agreement not to put
forward his son Gamal as his successor.
These steps might not satisfy everyone,
but they would be significant
concessions and give the protesters a
chance to organize ahead of the
elections.
For this delicate assignment, I
suggested Frank Wisner, a retired senior
diplomat who had served as
Ambassador to Egypt from 1986 to 1991
and had developed a strong personal
relationship with Mubarak. They had
spent many hours together discussing the
region and the world. Like his great
friend Richard Holbrooke, Wisner cut
his diplomatic teeth in Vietnam before
representing our country in hotspots all
over the world. In addition to Egypt, he
served as Ambassador in Zambia, the
Philippines, and India before retiring in
1997. I thought that if any American
could get through to Mubarak, it would
be Wisner. But some in the White House
were skeptical of Wisner and his
mission. They were ready to cut
Mubarak loose. President Obama was
losing patience, but he ultimately agreed
with me to give diplomacy one more
chance.
Wisner met with Mubarak on January
31 and delivered our message. Mubarak
listened but didn’t give an inch. He was
stressed, maybe even bewildered by
what was happening around him, but he
was in no way ready to give up his
power. Like so many autocrats before
him, he had come to view himself as
inseparable from the state. Mubarak was
enough of a realist to know he couldn’t
sit in his palace and ignore the protests
altogether. So he sent out his newly
appointed Vice President, the longtime
intelligence chief Omar Suleiman, to
propose a national dialogue about
possible reforms. Two days earlier
Mubarak had selected Suleiman to fill
the long-vacant Vice Presidency as a
half-hearted attempt to calm the protests.
Neither the promise of a national
dialogue nor the appointment of a Vice
President placated anyone.
That night the military also released a
remarkable statement declaring that it
would not use force against the Egyptian
people and recognizing the legitimacy of
the protesters’ rights and demands. This
was an ominous sign for Mubarak. If the
military abandoned him, there was no
way he could remain in power.
The first day of February saw more
huge protests. That afternoon in the
White House Situation Room, the
national security team once again
debated what to do. Halfway through our
discussion, we received news that
Mubarak was going on television to
address the nation. We turned to the
large video screens and waited to see
what the embattled leader would say.
Mubarak looked old and tired but
sounded defiant. He promised not to run
in the September election, to seek
reforms to the Constitution, and to ensure
a “peaceful transfer of power” before
the end of his term. But he did not lift the
emergency law or say that his son would
not run in his place, nor did he offer to
begin handing over any of his absolute
powers. Mubarak had actually come
around to much of what Wisner had
asked of him, but it was too little, too
late—both for the crowds in the streets
and the team in the Situation Room.
“That’s not going to cut it,” President
Obama said, visibly frustrated. Then he
called Mubarak and said the same thing.
We debated whether the President
should make a public statement
declaring that he was done waiting for
Mubarak to do what was right. Once
again senior Cabinet officials, including
me, counseled caution. We warned that
if the President appeared to be too
heavy-handed, it might backfire. But
other members of the team appealed
once again to the President’s idealism
and argued that events on the ground
were moving too quickly for us to wait.
He was swayed, and that evening he
went before the cameras in the Grand
Foyer of the White House. “It is not the
role of any other country to determine
Egypt’s leaders. Only the Egyptian
people can do that,” President Obama
said. “[But] what is clear—and what I
indicated tonight to President Mubarak
—is my belief that an orderly transition
must be meaningful, it must be peaceful,
and it must begin now.” When Press
Secretary Robert Gibbs was asked at his
briefing the next day to define “now,”
his answer left little room for doubt.
“Now means yesterday,” he said.
Things in Cairo got worse. Regime
supporters came out in force and clashed
violently with protesters. Men wielding
clubs and other weapons swept through
Tahrir Square on camels and horses,
cracking heads. I called Vice President
Suleiman to make it clear that such
violent repression was absolutely
unacceptable. The Egyptian leadership
did not repeat this tactic in the following
days. On February 4, I spoke once again
to Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit. In
earlier conversations he had come
across as confident and upbeat. Now he
couldn’t hide his frustration, even
desperation. He complained that the
United States was unceremoniously
shoving Mubarak out the door without
considering the consequences. Listen to
what the Iranians are saying, he warned.
They are eager to take advantage of
Egypt’s potential collapse. His fear of
an Islamist takeover was visceral. “I
have two granddaughters, one six and the
other eight,” he told me. “I want them to
grow up to be like their grandmother and
like you. Not wearing a niqab like in
Saudi Arabia. This is the fight of my
life.”
His words stayed with me as I flew to
Germany to address the Munich Security
Conference, a key gathering of leaders
and thinkers from across the
international community. For all our talk
about supporting democracy, what did
that really mean? Surely more than just
one election, one time. If Egypt’s women
saw their rights and opportunities rolled
back under a newly elected government,
was that democracy? What about if
minorities like Egypt’s Coptic Christians
were persecuted or marginalized? If
Mubarak was going to leave the
presidency and Egypt was going to begin
a transition, then these questions about
what would happen next would become
relevant and pressing.
In Munich, as in Doha a month before,
I made the case for political and
economic reforms across the Middle
East. “This is not simply a matter of
idealism,” I said. “It is a strategic
necessity. Without genuine progress
toward open and accountable political
systems, the gap between people and
their governments will only grow, and
instability will only deepen.” Of course,
these transitions would look different
and proceed at different speeds in each
country, depending on their unique
circumstances. But no nation could
ignore the aspirations of their people
forever.
At the same time, I warned, we should
be clear-eyed about the risks inherent in
any transition. Free and fair elections
would be necessary, but not sufficient.
Functioning democracies require the rule
of law, an independent judiciary, a free
press and civil society, respect for
human rights, minority rights, and
accountable governance. In a country
like Egypt, with a long history of
authoritarian rule, it would take strong,
inclusive leadership and sustained effort
from across society, as well as
international support, to put these
building blocks of democracy in place.
No one should expect them to appear
overnight. My words that day may have
sounded out of tune with the hope and
optimism many felt watching the protests
in Cairo, but they reflected the
challenges I saw ahead.
At the same conference in Munich,
Wisner, as a private citizen and no
longer playing any role for the
administration, appeared via satellite to
offer his personal opinion on the
situation. This distressed the White
House, which thought it had his
assurance that he would not discuss his
mission publicly. Wisner made waves
by saying Mubarak shouldn’t go
immediately but should oversee a
transition. His comments came across as
contradicting the President, and the
White House was annoyed that Wisner
had overstepped his brief. The President
called me to express his unhappiness
about the “mixed messages” we were
sending. That’s a diplomatic way of
saying he took me to the woodshed. The
President knew events in Egypt were not
in America’s control, but he wanted to
do right by both our interests and our
values. So did I. I knew Mubarak had
stayed too long and done too little. But
beyond getting rid of him, the people in
Tahrir Square seemed to have no plan.
Those of us who favored the stodgysounding “orderly transition” position
were concerned that the only organized
forces after Mubarak were the Muslim
Brotherhood and the military.
By February 10, hundreds had been
killed in clashes with security forces.
The violence fed the protesters’ rage and
their demands that Mubarak resign.
Rumors swirled that he would finally
bow to the pressure. Expectations ran
high as Mubarak delivered yet another
address to the nation. This time he
announced the transfer of some of his
powers to Vice President Suleiman, but
still he refused to step down or accept
the need for a transition in which he
relinquished power. The crowds in
Tahrir Square were infuriated.
The next day, February 11, Mubarak
finally accepted defeat. Vice President
Suleiman, looking worn and drawn,
appeared on television and announced
that the President had stepped down and
ceded all his powers to the military
leadership. An Army spokesman read a
statement pledging to “conduct free and
fair presidential elections” and answer
“the legitimate demands of the people.”
Mubarak himself did not speak, instead
quietly departing Cairo for his residence
on the Red Sea. Unlike Ben Ali in
Tunisia, he did not flee the country,
staying true to his defiant promise, “I
will die in Egypt.” That last act of
stubbornness left him exposed to
prosecution and retribution, and he has
spent the following years under house
arrest, in court, or in the hospital as his
health reportedly declined.
About a month later I visited Cairo
and walked through Tahrir Square
myself. My security team was nervous
about what we were heading into; it was
a complete unknown. But as Egyptians
thronged around me, the overwhelming
message was one of warmth and
hospitality. “Thank you for coming,”
several people said. “Welcome to the
new Egypt!” others shouted. They were
proud of the revolution they had won.
Then I met with a number of the
students and activists who had played
leading roles in the demonstrations. I
was curious to hear about their plans to
move from protests to politics and how
they planned to influence the writing of a
new Constitution and contest the
upcoming elections. I found a
disorganized group not prepared to
contest or influence anything. They had
no experience in politics, no
understanding about how to organize
parties, run candidates, or conduct
campaigns. They didn’t have platforms
and showed little interest in forming
them. Instead they argued among
themselves, blamed the United States for
a variety of sins, and were largely
dismissive of electoral politics. “Have
you considered forming a political
coalition and joining together on behalf
of candidates and programs?” I asked.
They just looked at me blankly. I came
away worried that they would end up
handing the country to the Muslim
Brotherhood or the military by default,
which in the end is exactly what
happened.
The acting head of state was
Mubarak’s Defense Minister, Field
Marshall Mohamed Tantawi, who had
promised to preside over a smooth
transition to a democratically elected
civilian government. When I met him in
Cairo, he was so tired he could barely
hold his head up. The shadows under his
eyes reached practically down to his
mouth. He was a professional soldier
through and through, whose bearing and
appearance reminded me of General
Ashfaq Parvez Kayani in Pakistan. Both
men were committed nationalists,
devoted to the military cultures that
produced them, and uneasy with both
their dependence on aid from the United
States and the political and economic
threats they perceived to their respective
militaries’ enormous powers. As
Tantawi and I talked about his plans for
the transition, I could see him choosing
his words carefully. He was in a
difficult position, trying to save his
beloved Army from the wreckage of the
Mubarak regime, protect the people, as
the Army had promised to do, and do
right by the former leader who had
nurtured his career. In the end Tantawi
followed through on his promise to hold
elections. And when his preferred
candidate, former Prime Minister
Ahmed Shafik, narrowly lost to
Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim
Brotherhood, he allowed the result to
stand.
Throughout the delicate transition
process, the United States tried to walk a
tightrope, promoting our democratic
values and strategic interests without
taking sides or backing particular
candidates or factions. Yet despite our
efforts to play a neutral and constructive
role, many Egyptians viewed America
with distrust. Supporters of the Muslim
Brotherhood accused us of having
propped up the Mubarak regime and
suspected that we would collude with
the military to keep them from power.
Their opponents feared the prospect of
Islamist rule and alleged that the United
States had conspired with the
Brotherhood to force out Mubarak. I
wasn’t sure how we could be accused of
both aiding and foiling the Muslim
Brotherhood, but logic never gets in the
way of a good conspiracy theory.
When I returned to Egypt in July 2012,
I found the streets of Cairo once again
seething with protests. But this time they
weren’t directed at the government—
they were directed at me. Crowds
gathered outside my hotel, and as we
drove into its parking garage through the
side entrance, people banged on our
vehicles. Egyptian police did nothing to
stop them, and my Diplomatic Security
agents were forced to push the crowd
back themselves, something they
ordinarily wouldn’t do. Once inside my
room more than a dozen stories up, I
could hear the din of angry antiAmerican chants. My security and staff
spent an anxious night prepared to
evacuate the hotel if required. Despite
warnings of more protests in Alexandria,
I insisted we stick to the plan and fly
there the next day to officially open a
renovated American Consulate. After the
event, as we left to get into our cars, we
were forced to walk near the angry
crowd. Toria Nuland, my intrepid
spokeswoman, was hit in the head by a
tomato (she took the blow gracefully),
and a man pounded his shoe against my
car’s window as we pulled out heading
to the airport.
In Cairo, along with separate meetings
with Morsi and the generals, I sat down
with a group of concerned Coptic
Christians at the U.S. Embassy. They
were deeply anxious about what the
future held for them and their country. It
was a very emotional, personal
conversation.
One of the most moving scenes from
the revolution in Tahrir Square was
when Christian protesters formed a
protective circle around their Muslim
comrades during the call to prayer. The
reverse happened when the Christians
celebrated a Mass. Sadly, that spirit of
unity had not lasted. Just a month after
the fall of Mubarak, there were reports
from the city of Qena that a group of
Salafists had cut off the ear of a Coptic
Christian schoolteacher and burned his
house and car. Other attacks followed.
Morsi’s election only heightened fears in
the Christian community.
In our meeting, one of the more
agitated participants brought up an
especially outrageous canard. He
accused my trusted aide Huma Abedin,
who is Muslim, of being a secret agent
of the Muslim Brotherhood. This claim
had been circulated by some unusually
irresponsible and demagogic right-wing
political and media personalities in the
United States, including members of
Congress, and now it had turned up in
Cairo. I wasn’t going to let that stand
and told him in no uncertain terms how
wrong he was. After a few minutes of
conversation the embarrassed accuser
apologized and asked why a member of
the U.S. Congress would make such an
assertion if it wasn’t true. I laughed and
said that unfortunately plenty of
falsehoods are circulated in Congress.
After the meeting Huma went right up to
the man, politely introduced herself, and
offered to answer any questions he had.
It was a characteristically gracious
move on her part.
Privately I was furious at the attacks
on Huma by several ignorant House
members. So I was grateful to Senator
John McCain, who had gotten to know
her over the years, when he went to the
floor of the Senate and made his own
disdain clear: “When anyone, not least a
member of Congress, launches vicious
and degrading attacks against fellow
Americans on the basis of nothing more
than fear of who they are, in ignorance of
what they stand for, it defames the spirit
of our nation, and we all grow poor
because of it. Our reputations, our
character, are the only things we leave
behind when we depart this earth. And
unjust acts that malign the good name of
a decent and honorable person, is not
only wrong, it is contrary to everything
we hold dear.”
Several weeks later, with Huma
sitting at his side at the White House’s
annual Iftar dinner to break the Ramadan
fast, President Obama also defended her,
saying, “The American people owe her a
debt of gratitude—because Huma is an
American patriot, and an example of
what we need in this country—more
public servants with her sense of
decency, her grace and her generosity of
spirit. So, on behalf of all Americans,
we thank you so much.” The President of
the United States and one of our nation’s
most renowned war heroes make quite a
one-two punch. It was a real testament to
Huma’s character.
In our meeting I told the Coptic
leaders that the United States would
stand firmly on the side of religious
freedom. All citizens should have the
right to live, work, and worship as they
choose, whether they be Muslim or
Christian or from any other background.
No group or faction should impose its
authority, ideology, or religion on
anyone else. America was prepared to
work with the leaders that the Egyptian
people chose. But our engagement with
those leaders would be based on their
commitment to universal human rights
and democratic principles.
Unfortunately the months and years
that followed proved that my early
concerns about the difficulties of
democratic transitions were wellfounded. The Muslim Brotherhood
consolidated its power but failed to
govern in a transparent or inclusive
fashion. President Morsi clashed
frequently with the judiciary, sought to
marginalize his political opponents
rather than build a broad national
consensus, did little to improve the
economy, and allowed the persecution of
minorities, including the Coptic
Christians, to continue. But he did
surprise some skeptics by upholding the
peace treaty with Israel and by helping
me negotiate a cease-fire in Gaza in
November 2012. Once again the United
States faced our classic dilemma:
Should we do business with a leader
with whom we disagreed on so many
things in the name of advancing core
security interests? We were back on the
high wire, performing the balancing act
without easy answers or good options.
In July 2013, with millions of
Egyptians again protesting in the streets,
this time against the overreaches of the
Morsi government, the military under
Tantawi’s successor, General AbdulFattah el-Sisi, stepped in a second time.
They removed Morsi and began an
aggressive new crackdown on the
Muslim Brotherhood.
As of 2014, the prospects for
Egyptian democracy do not look bright.
Sisi is running for President with only
token opposition, and he appears to be
following in the classic mold of Middle
Eastern strongmen. Many Egyptians
seem tired of the chaos and ready for a
return to stability. But, there is little
reason to believe that restored military
rule will be any more sustainable than it
was under Mubarak. To do so it will
have to be more inclusive, more
responsible for the needs of the people,
and eventually, more democratic. In the
end, the test for Egypt and other
countries across the Middle East will be
whether they can build credible
democratic institutions that uphold the
rights of every citizen while providing
security and stability in the face of old
enmities across faith, ethnic, economic,
and geographic divides. That will not be
easy, as recent history has shown, but the
alternative is to watch the region keep
sinking into the sand.

King Abdullah II of Jordan managed to
stay ahead of the wave of unrest that
washed away other governments in the
region during the Arab Spring. Jordan
held credible legislative elections and
began cracking down on corruption, but
the economy remained stagnant, in large
measure because Jordan is one of the
world’s most energy-starved nations.
Roughly 80 percent of its energy came
from natural gas delivered via pipelines
from Egypt. But after the fall of Mubarak
and the rise of instability in the Sinai,
those pipelines, which also carried gas
to Israel, became the frequent target of
attacks and sabotage, interrupting the
flow of energy into Jordan.
Costly government subsidies were
keeping the price of electricity from
spiraling out of control, but as a result
the country’s public debt was
ballooning. The King faced a difficult
dilemma: cut the subsidies, let energy
prices rise, and face the wrath of the
people, or maintain the subsidies and run
the risk of financial meltdown.
One obvious answer lay to the east, in
Iraq, where the United States was
helping the government of Prime
Minister Nouri al-Maliki rebuild its
wrecked oil and gas industry. A less
obvious and more controversial source
of energy lay to the west, in Israel,
which had just discovered extensive
natural gas reserves in the eastern
Mediterranean. The two countries had
been at peace since the signing of a
historic treaty in 1994, but Israel
remained deeply unpopular among the
Jordanian public, a majority of whom
were of Palestinian origin. Given all his
other troubles, could the King risk more
protests by pursuing a major new trade
deal with Israel? Could he afford not to?
Over lunch with the King at the State
Department in January 2012, and in
follow-up discussions with his Foreign
Minister Nasser Judeh, I urged them to
start talking to the Israelis—in secret if
necessary.
With U.S. support, Jordan began
negotiating with both Iraq and Israel. An
agreement with Iraq was signed in 2013
that, with the construction of a pipeline
from southern Iraq to Aqaba on the Red
Sea, should provide Jordan 1 million
barrels per day of crude oil and more
than 250 million cubic feet of natural
gas. After a year of secret talks with the
Israelis, a deal was announced in early
2014 to use Israeli natural gas from the
eastern Mediterranean to fuel a power
plant on the Jordanian side of the Dead
Sea. The King was not wrong to have
been cautious; representatives of the
Muslim Brotherhood in Jordan slammed
the agreement with the “Zionist entity”
as “an attack on the Palestinian cause.”
But it promised a future of greater
energy security for Jordan and a new
source of cooperation for two neighbors
in a region of enormous challenges.

Perhaps our most delicate balancing act
in the Middle East was with our partners
in the Persian Gulf: Bahrain, Kuwait,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. The
United States had developed deep
economic and strategic ties to these
wealthy, conservative monarchies, even
as we made no secret of our concerns
about human rights abuses, especially
the treatment of women and minorities,
and the export of extremist ideology.
Every U.S. administration wrestled
with the contradictions of our policy
toward the Gulf. The choices were never
harder than after 9/11. Americans were
shocked that fifteen of the nineteen
hijackers and Osama bin Laden himself
hailed from Saudi Arabia, a nation that
we had defended in the 1991 Gulf War.
And it was appalling that money from
the Gulf continued funding extremist
madrassas and propaganda all over the
world.
At the same time, these governments
shared many of our top security
concerns. Saudi Arabia had expelled bin
Laden, and the kingdom’s security forces
had become strong partners in the fight
against al Qaeda. Most of the Gulf states
shared our worries about Iran’s march
toward a nuclear weapon along with its
aggressive support of terrorism. These
tensions were rooted in an ancient
sectarian split within Islam: Iran is
predominantly Shiite, while the Gulf
states are predominantly Sunni. Bahrain
is an exception. There, as in Iraq under
Saddam, an elite Sunni minority rules
over a Shiite majority. In Syria the
situation is reversed.
To support our shared security
interests over the years and help deter
Iranian aggression, the United States
sold large amounts of military equipment
to the Gulf states, and stationed the U.S.
Navy’s 5th Fleet in Bahrain, the
Combined Air and Space Operations
Center in Qatar, and maintained troops
in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE,
as well as key bases in other countries.
When I became Secretary I developed
personal relationships with Gulf leaders
both individually and as a group through
the Gulf Cooperation Council, a
political and economic association of
the Gulf countries. We created a U.S.GCC security dialogue to intensify our
cooperation. Most of the focus of our
discussions was on Iran and
counterterrorism, but I pressed leaders
on the need to open up their societies,
respect human rights, and offer more
opportunities to their young people and
women.
Occasionally, as in an egregious case
of child marriage in Saudi Arabia, I was
able to make some headway. I learned
about an eight-year-old girl whose father
forced her to marry a fifty-year-old man
in exchange for about $13,000. Saudi
courts rejected pleas from her mother to
stop the marriage, and it did not look
like the government was going to
intervene. I knew that embarrassing
governments with public condemnation
can backfire, making them dig their heels
in deeper. Instead of calling a press
conference to condemn the practice and
demand action, I looked for a way to
persuade the Saudis to do the right thing
and still save face. Quietly reaching out
through diplomatic channels, I offered a
simple but firm message: “Fix this on
your own and I won’t say a word.” The
Saudis appointed a new judge who
quickly granted a divorce. It was a
lesson I’ve learned all over the world:
There’s a time to get on a soapbox—and
I’ve been on quite a few—but sometimes
the best way to achieve real change, in
diplomacy and in life, is by building
relationships and understanding how and
when to use them.
I responded differently to the ban on
women driving in Saudi Arabia. In May
2011, a Saudi woman activist posted a
video online of her driving a car and
was subsequently arrested and detained
for nine days. In June, a few dozen
women across Saudi Arabia took the
wheel in protest. I spoke with Saudi
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal
on the phone and raised my personal
concern on the issue. In this case I also
spoke out publicly, calling the women
“brave,” expressing how moved I was
by their actions. When another group of
women again protested the ban on
October 26, 2013, some opponents
falsely pointed to the date—my birthday
—as proof that the protests were
organized outside Saudi Arabia.
Unfortunately for the kingdom and its
women, the ban continues.
When I traveled to Saudi Arabia in
February 2010, I balanced my itinerary
between security talks with the King and
a visit to a women’s university in
Jeddah. Both were memorable in their
own way.
I was greeted at the airport in Riyadh,
the capital, by Prince Saud al-Faisal, a
seventy-year-old Princeton-educated
royal who had served as the kingdom’s
Foreign Minister since 1975. Like most
Saudis I met, he alternated between
wearing tailored bespoke suits and long
flowing robes with a kaffiyeh headdress.
I appreciated spending time with the
Prince, who understood the forces,
representing tradition and modernity,
that were competing for ascendancy in
the region.
King Abdullah, who was in his
eighties, had invited me to visit him at
his desert camp an hour outside of town,
and in a first for me, he sent his personal
luxury tour bus to pick us up. The bus
was lavishly appointed, and the Prince
and I sat across the aisle from each other
in plush leather seats as we drove
through the countryside. I noticed a
number of encampments filled with
camels. The Prince and I started a funny
conversation about the popularity of the
kingdom’s camel population, which
seems to stem from both practical and
sentimental reasons. He discussed the
long history nomads had with their
camels but told me that he personally
didn’t like them. I was surprised—
imagine an Australian hating koala bears
or a Chinese loathing pandas—but then I
haven’t had to spend too much time
around camels myself, and I’ve heard
they can be ornery.
Soon we arrived at what had been
described to us as a desert “camp,” but
which turned out to be a massive airconditioned tent pitched over a palace
with marble floors and gilded
bathrooms, surrounded by trailers and
helicopters. The dignified monarch in
long black robes was waiting for us.
Contrary to some of my American
colleagues, who like to get right down to
business, I usually start my side of an
official conversation with small talk as a
signal of my respect and friendship. So I
continued with the camel theme. “I want
you to know, Your Majesty, that His
Highness thinks camels are ugly,” I said,
gesturing to Prince Saud. The King
smiled. “I think His Highness was not
being fair to camels,” he said. The King,
the Prince, and I bantered for a while,
and then he invited our entire traveling
party, consisting of nearly forty people
including the press corps, to join him for
an elaborate lunch. He walked me down
what seemed like an endless buffet table,
with two stewards trailing behind with
our trays. There were dozens of dishes,
ranging from local favorites like lamb
and rice to lobster and paella. The
journalists and staff, for whom meals on
the road are often catch-as-catch-can,
looked like they’d died and gone to
foodie heaven. Waiters hovered nearby,
ready to refill our plates. I sat next to the
King at the head of a long U-shaped
table with a giant flat-screen television
in the middle of the hollow space
prominently positioned so the King
could watch soccer and off-road racing
while he ate. He turned the volume up
very loud so that no one else in the
crowded room could hear what we
discussed. I leaned in and we began to
talk.
We spent four hours together that
afternoon, delving into the region’s
challenges, from Iran to Iraq to the
Israelis and Palestinians. The King
spoke forcefully about the need to
prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear
weapon and urged us to take a harder
line with Tehran. He expressed his hope
that more Saudi students would be
allowed to study in the United States,
which had become more difficult since
9/11. It was a productive meeting, and it
signaled that our partnership was on firm
footing. The differences between our
cultures, values, and political systems
are vast, but working together where
possible advances America’s interests.
The next day I got a firsthand
reminder of how complicated this all is.
Huma’s mother, Dr. Saleha Abedin, is
vice dean at Dar Al-Hekma, a women’s
university in Jeddah, where I had
arranged to hold a town hall discussion
with the students. As I walked into the
auditorium, I saw the crowd of young
women, all with their hair covered under
hijabs and a few with their faces
covered as well.
In Arabic, Dar Al-Hekma means “The
House of Wisdom,” and I talked to the
students about how much wisdom there
is in making sure that girls as well as
boys have access to education. I quoted
the Egyptian poet Hafez Ibrahim, who
wrote, “A mother is a school. Empower
her and you empower a great nation,”
and I talked about my own experiences
with all-women’s education at
Wellesley. The students peppered me
with probing questions about everything
from Iran’s nuclear ambitions to the
plight of the Palestinians and the
prospects for health care reform in
America. One of them asked me what I
thought of Sarah Palin and if I’d move to
Canada if she ever became President.
(No, I said, I would not flee.) These
women might have limited opportunities
to participate publicly in their
ultraconservative society, but there was
nothing limited about their intelligence,
energy, and curiosity.
Throughout the entire event, one of the
female security officers, who was
covered head to toe in black with two
tiny slits for her eyes, kept vigilant
watch on all the Americans. She was not
going to let any of the male staff or
journalists get anywhere near these
students. As I was wrapping up onstage,
she approached Huma and whispered to
her in Arabic, “I would love to have a
picture with her.” When I finished,
Huma pulled me aside and pointed to
this shrouded woman. “Should we go to
a private room to do it?” I asked, out of
respect for her modesty. She nodded,
and we ducked into a small office. Then,
just as we were about to take the photo,
the woman pulled off her veil, revealing
a huge smile. The camera snapped, and
the veil came back down. Welcome to
Saudi Arabia.
Almost exactly a year later the
delicate balance of our relationships in
the Gulf threatened to unravel. The wave
of popular protests that started in
Tunisia and crashed into Egypt did not
stop there. The call for political reform
and economic opportunity spread across
the entire Middle East. No country was
untouched. Yemen was almost torn
apart, and President Saleh eventually
was forced to leave office. Libya
descended into civil war. The
governments in Jordan and Morocco
made cautious but real reforms. In Saudi
Arabia the Royal Family opened their
deep pockets in an attempt to placate
citizens with more generous social
welfare programs.
Bahrain, as the home base for the U.S.
Navy in the Persian Gulf, was an
exceptionally complicated case for us. In
this least wealthy of the Gulf
monarchies, demonstrations took on a
sectarian cast, with the majority Shiites
protesting against their Sunni rulers. In
mid-February 2011, crowds demanding
democratic reforms and equality for all
Bahrainis, regardless of sect, gathered at
a major traffic intersection in central
Manama called the Pearl Roundabout.
Events in Tunisia and Egypt left security
forces across the region on edge, and a
few early incidents of excessive force in
Manama brought more angry citizens
into the streets.
Around 3 A.M. on Thursday, February
17, a handful of protesters camped out in
the Pearl Roundabout were killed in a
police raid, sparking widespread
outrage. But the Sunni leaders in Bahrain
and in neighboring Gulf countries did not
see the largely Shiite protests as a
popular outpouring for democracy; they
saw the hidden hand of Iran. They
worried that their large adversary across
the water was fomenting unrest in order
to weaken their governments and
improve its own strategic position.
Given Iran’s track record, this was not
an unreasonable fear. But it clouded
their perception of the legitimate
grievances of their people and hastened
the use of force.
I got on the phone with the Bahraini
Foreign Minister Sheikh Khalid bin
Ahmed al Khalifa to express my concern
about the violence and the possibility of
events spiraling out of control. The next
day would be crucial, and I hoped his
government would take steps to avoid
further violence around the funerals and
Friday prayer services, which had
become times of mobilization across the
region. Responding to peaceful protests
with force was a recipe for more
trouble. “This is a misreading of the
world we are in, which is becoming a
much more complicated environment,” I
said. “I want you to hear it from me. We
do not want any violence that allows
outside interference in your internal
affairs. In order to avoid this, there has
to be effort at genuine consultations.”
We both knew that “outside
interference” was code for Iran. My
point was that excessive force could
lead to instability that Iran would be
able to exploit, which was the very thing
his government was trying to avoid.
The Foreign Minister sounded
worried, and his answers only
heightened my concern. He said that the
police action had not been planned,
blamed the protesters for starting the
violence, and promised that his
government was committed to dialogue
and reform. “These deaths were
catastrophic,” he said. “We are at the
brink of a sectarian abyss.” That was a
chilling phrase. I told him that I was
sending Jeff Feltman to Bahrain
immediately. “We will come with
suggestions, trying to be helpful and
productive during this difficult time. I’m
not saying there is an easy answer. Your
situation is particularly challenging
because of the sectarian situation you
face. I have no doubt you have a big
neighbor interested in this matter in a
way other countries do not.”
Spurred to action by fears of growing
violence and encouraged by Jeff, who
spent a lot of time on the ground in
Manama over the following weeks, the
Bahraini Crown Prince tried to organize
a national dialogue to address some of
the concerns of the protesters and ease
the tensions gripping the country. The
Crown Prince was a moderate who
understood the need for reform and was
the ruling family’s best chance to
reconcile the competing factions in the
country. Behind the scenes Jeff was
working to broker an understanding
between the Royal Family and the more
moderate leaders of the Shiite
opposition. But the protests kept
growing, and by March, protesters were
calling for an end to the monarchy
altogether. Clashes with police were
getting bigger and more violent. It
seemed as if the government was losing
control, and conservative members of
the Bahraini ruling family were putting
pressure on the Crown Prince to
abandon his mediation efforts.
On Sunday, March 13, our defense
attaché at the embassy in Riyadh
reported unusual troop movements in
Saudi Arabia that might be heading
toward Bahrain. Jeff called the UAE
Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin
Zayed Al-Nahyan, or AbZ, as he was
often referred to, who confirmed that a
military intervention was about to be
launched. Bahrain’s government was
going to invite its neighbors in to help
provide security. They had not seen the
need to inform the United States, as they
did not intend to ask our permission or
entertain any entreaties to stop. The next
day thousands of Saudi troops crossed
the border into Bahrain with some 150
armored vehicles. About five hundred
police from the UAE followed.
I was concerned about this escalation
and worried about a bloodbath if Saudi
tanks started rolling through the
barricaded streets of Manama. And the
timing could not have been worse. At
that very moment we were deep into
diplomatic negotiations to build an
international coalition to protect Libyan
civilians from an impending massacre by
Colonel Muammar Qaddafi, and we
were counting on the UAE and other
Gulf nations to play key roles. The Arab
League had voted on March 12 to
request that the UN Security Council
impose a no-fly zone in Libya, and their
active participation in any military
operation would provide legitimacy in
the region. Otherwise the international
community might not be able to act.
After Iraq and Afghanistan, we weren’t
going to risk looking like we’d launched
another Western intervention in a
Muslim country.
I was in Paris for meetings on Libya,
as was AbZ, so we arranged to meet at
my hotel. On the way in, he was asked
by a reporter about the situation in
Bahrain. “The Bahrain Government
asked us yesterday to look at ways to
help them to defuse the tension,” he said.
I was worried exactly the opposite was
about to happen. The next day the King
of Bahrain declared a state of
emergency. I spoke with the Saudi
Foreign Minister and urged him to hold
off using force to clear the protesters.
Just give Jeff a little more time to make
negotiations work, I said. Even twentyfour hours might make a difference. We
were close to a deal with the major
Shiite political party to pull back from
the key areas of the city in exchange for
the government affirming the right to
peaceful protest and starting a good-faith
dialogue. Saud al-Faisal was
implacable. The protesters needed to go
home and let normal life resume, he
said. Only then could we talk about a
deal. He blamed Iran for stirring up
trouble and supporting radicals. It was
time to end the crisis and return stability
to the Gulf, he said.
Early on March 16, security forces
moved in to clear the Pearl Roundabout.
Riot police supported by tanks and
helicopters clashed with protesters and
used tear gas to evict them from their
makeshift camp. Five people were
killed. The arrival of the Saudi troops
and this new crackdown further inflamed
Shiite opinion across the country. Under
pressure from hard-liners in both camps,
the negotiations between the opposition
and the Crown Prince collapsed.
I was in Cairo meeting with the
Egyptian transitional authorities and was
dismayed by the reports coming in from
Bahrain. In an interview with the BBC, I
spoke candidly about my concerns. “The
situation in Bahrain is alarming,” I said.
“We have called on our friends in the
Gulf—four of whom are assisting the
Bahrain security efforts—to force
through a political solution, not a
security standoff.”
“So what leverage do you still have
on countries like Bahrain and Saudi
Arabia?” the BBC’s Kim Ghattas asked.
“They’re your allies. You train their
armies. You supply them with weapons.
And yet when the Saudis decided to send
troops into Bahrain—and I believe
Washington made clear it wasn’t
pleased about that—they said, ‘Don’t
interfere. This is an internal GCC
matter.’ ” It was true, and it was
frustrating.
“Well, they are on notice as to what
we think,” I replied. “And we will
intend to make that very clear publicly
and privately, and we will do everything
we can to try to move this off the wrong
track, which we believe is going to
undermine long-term progress in
Bahrain, to the right track, which is the
political and economic track.”
Those might sound like reasonable
words—and they were—but they were
more pointed than how we usually speak
in public about the Gulf countries. My
message was heard loud and clear in the
Gulf. In Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, our
partners were angry and offended.
On March 19, I was back in Paris
putting the final touches on the Libya
coalition. With Qaddafi’s forces closing
in on the rebel stronghold of Benghazi,
UN-backed air operations were
imminent. I spoke once again with AbZ
and emphasized that America remained
committed to our partnership, as I did
personally. There was a long silence on
the phone and the line went dead. Had
things gotten that bad, I wondered? Then
we were reconnected. “Did you hear
me?” I asked. “I was listening!” he
responded. “Good, I was talking and
talking and then there was a long silence,
and I thought, what have I done here?”
He laughed. But then he got serious
again and delivered a sharp blow.
“Frankly, when we have a situation with
our armed forces in Bahrain, it’s hard to
participate in another operation if our
armed forces’ commitment to Bahrain is
questioned by our main ally,” he said. In
other words, forget about Arab
participation in the Libya mission.
This was turning into a disaster. I had
to fix it, fast. But how? There were no
good options here. Our values and
conscience demanded that the United
States condemn the violence against
civilians we were seeing in Bahrain, full
stop. After all, that was the very
principle at play in Libya. But if we
persisted, the carefully constructed
international coalition to stop Qaddafi
could collapse at the eleventh hour, and
we might fail to prevent a much larger
abuse—a full-fledged massacre.
I told AbZ that I wanted to reach a
constructive understanding. He asked if
we could meet in person. “I am hearing
you now, and we want a way out. And
you know we are keen to take part in
Libya,” he said. A few hours later, just
after 6 P.M. in Paris, I sat down with him
and told him that I could craft a
statement that would stay true to our
values without being insulting to them. I
hoped that would be enough to convince
the Emiratis to rejoin the mission in
Libya. If not, we were prepared to go
forward without them.
That evening I held a press conference
at the stately home of the U.S.
Ambassador in Paris. I spoke about
Libya and stressed that Arab leadership
in the air campaign was crucial. Then I
turned to Bahrain. “Our goal is a
credible political process that can
address the legitimate aspirations of all
the people of Bahrain, starting with the
Crown Prince’s dialogue, which all
parties should join.” Bahrain had the
right to invite in forces from neighboring
countries, I added, and we welcomed
word from the Gulf countries that they
would provide a major aid package for
economic and social development. “We
have made clear that security alone
cannot resolve the challenges facing
Bahrain,” I continued. “Violence is not
and cannot be the answer. A political
process is. We have raised our concerns
about the current measures directly with
Bahraini officials and will continue to
do so.”
The differences in tone and substance
from what I said in Cairo were
relatively small, and I felt comfortable
that we had not sacrificed our values or
credibility. Few, if any, outside
observers even noticed any change at
all. Soon the Arab jets were flying over
Libya.
I wished we had better options in
Bahrain and more leverage to produce a
positive outcome. We continued to speak
out in the months that followed,
emphasizing that mass arrests and brute
force were at odds with the universal
rights of Bahrain’s citizens and would
not make legitimate calls for reform go
away. We also continued to work
closely with the government of Bahrain
and with its Gulf neighbors on a range of
issues.
In November 2011, in a speech at the
National Democratic Institute in
Washington, I addressed some of the
questions that had arisen about America
and the Arab Spring. One that we heard
often was: Why does America promote
democracy one way in some countries
and another way in others? In short, why
do we call on Mubarak to give up power
in Egypt and mobilize an international
military coalition to stop Qaddafi in
Libya, while retaining relations with
Bahrain and other Gulf monarchies?
The answer, I said, began with a very
practical point. Circumstances varied
dramatically from country to country,
and “it would be foolish to take a onesize-fits-all approach and barrel
forward regardless of circumstances on
the ground.” What was possible and
made sense in one place might not be
possible or wise in another. It was also
true, I said, that America has many
important national interests in the region,
and they will not always align perfectly,
despite our best efforts. “We’ll always
have to walk and chew gum at the same
time.” That was certainly true in
Bahrain. America will always have
imperfect partners who doubtless view
us as imperfect too, and we’ll always
face imperatives that drive us to make
imperfect compromises.

I saw this in February 2012 when I
returned to Tunisia, where the
convulsions of the Arab Spring had
begun. The riot police were gone. There
was no more pepper spray in the air.
The din of protest had quieted. A
moderate Islamist party had won a
plurality of the votes in an open,
competitive, and credible election. Its
leaders promised to embrace freedom of
religion and full rights for women. The
United States pledged significant
financial support, and we began working
to boost trade and investment that would
get the economy going again. The new
government faced many challenges, and
the years ahead would be rocky, but
there was reason to hope that, in Tunisia
at least, the promise of the Arab Spring
might actually be realized.
I wanted to talk to the young people
who had provided the emotional core of
the revolution and who stood to gain the
most if democracy took root in Tunisia.
About two hundred of them met with me
in the Palais du Baron d’Erlanger, a
center for Arab and Mediterranean
music perched on a cliff above the sea. I
spoke about the hard work of making a
transition to democracy and about the
role their generation could play. Then I
took questions. A young lawyer asked
for the microphone. “I think that there
exists among many young people in
Tunisia and across the region a deep
feeling of mistrust towards the West in
general and the United States in
particular. And many observers partly
explain the surge of extremism in the
region and in Tunisia by this
skepticism,” he said. “And even among
the mainstream of moderate and proWestern youth, there is a sense of
despair and fatalism when it comes to
the possibility of building a real and
lasting partnership that is based on
mutual interests. So is the United States
aware of this issue? And how do you
think we can address it?”
He had just put his finger on one of
our biggest challenges. And I understood
that the distrust he and so many others
felt was connected to the compromises
we had to make in the Middle East. “We
are aware of it,” I responded. “We
regret it. We feel that it doesn’t reflect
the values or the policy of the United
States.” I tried to explain why America
had worked with autocrats in the region
for so long, from Ben Ali in Tunisia to
Mubarak in Egypt to our partners in the
Gulf. “You deal with the governments
that are in place. And yes, we did. We
dealt with the governments that were in
place, just like we deal with the
governments elsewhere. Right now,
we’re in a big argument with Russia and
China because they won’t agree to the
Security Council resolution to help the
poor people in Syria. But we don’t stop
dealing with Russia and China across a
whole range of issues because we have
serious disagreements with them. So I
think part of it is to recognize the reality
that governments have to deal with, and
to look at the whole picture.”
I knew this wasn’t very satisfying, but
it was the truth. America will always do
what it takes to keep our people safe and
advance our core interests. Sometimes
that means working with partners with
whom we have deep disagreements.
But there is another part of the big
picture that is often lost, a truth about
America that is easy to miss amid the
daily headlines of one crisis or another.
The United States has sacrificed
enormous amounts of blood and treasure
to help other people around the world
achieve their own freedom. Looking
around at the open and engaged young
Tunisians, I rattled off a string of
examples, including how America
helped the people of Eastern Europe
emerge from behind the Iron Curtain and
nurtured democracies across Asia. “I
will be the first to say we, like any
country in the world, have made
mistakes. I will be the first to say that.
We’ve made a lot of mistakes. But I
think if you look at the entire historical
record, the entire historical record
shows we’ve been on the side of
freedom, we’ve been on the side of
human rights, we’ve been on the side of
free markets and economic
empowerment.” The young lawyer
nodded and sat down.
16

Libya: All Necessary
Measures

Mahmoud Jibril was late.
It was March 14, 2011, little more
than a month after the fall of Hosni
Mubarak in Egypt. Attention had already
shifted to the next crisis in the region,
this time in Libya, a country of some 6
million people located between Egypt
and Tunisia along the Mediterranean
coast of North Africa. Protests against
the authoritarian regime of longtime
Libyan dictator, Colonel Muammar
Qaddafi, had turned into a full-scale
rebellion after he used extreme force
against the demonstrators. Now Jibril, a
Libyan political scientist with a PhD
from the University of Pittsburgh, was on
his way to meet with me on behalf of the
rebels fighting Qaddafi’s forces.
I had flown through the night and
arrived in Paris early that morning to
meet with the Foreign Ministers of the
Group of 8 leading industrialized
countries—France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the United Kingdom, Canada,
Russia, and the United States—to
discuss ways to stop Qaddafi from
slaughtering his own people. (Russia
was expelled from the group in 2014,
after the invasion of Crimea, and it went
back to being the G-7, as it was before
1998.) Joining us were Ministers from
several Arab countries who were calling
for robust international action to protect
Libyan civilians, especially from
Qaddafi’s air force. When I arrived I
spent most of the day locked in intense
discussions with European and Arab
leaders concerned that Qaddafi’s
superior forces were poised to
overwhelm the rebels. When I met with
French President Nicolas Sarkozy, he
urged the United States to support
international military intervention to stop
Qaddafi’s advance toward the rebel
stronghold of Benghazi in eastern Libya.
I was sympathetic, but not convinced.
The United States had spent the previous
decade bogged down in long and
difficult wars in Iraq and Afghanistan,
and before we joined yet another
conflict, I wanted to be sure we had
thought through the implications. Would
the international community, including
Libya’s neighbors, unite behind this
mission? Who were these rebels we
would be aiding, and were they
prepared to lead Libya if Qaddafi fell?
What was the endgame here? I wanted to
meet Mahmoud Jibril face-to-face to
discuss these questions.
My suite in the grand old Westin-
Vendôme on rue de Rivoli looked out
over the Tuileries Garden, and from the
window I could see the Eiffel Tower lit
up against the Parisian sky. The beauty
and color of Paris were a long way from
the horror unfolding in Libya.
It had started in a now-familiar way.
The arrest of a prominent human rights
activist in Benghazi in mid-February
2011 had sparked protests that soon
spread across the country. Libyans,
inspired by what they had seen in
Tunisia and Egypt, began demanding a
say in their own government. Unlike in
Egypt, where the Army refused to fire on
civilians, Libyan security forces
unleashed heavy weapons on the
crowds. Qaddafi turned loose foreign
mercenaries and thugs to attack
demonstrators. There were reports of
indiscriminate killings, arbitrary arrests,
and torture. Soldiers were executed for
refusing to fire on their fellow citizens.
In response to this violent crackdown,
protests morphed into armed rebellion,
especially in parts of the country that had
long chafed at Qaddafi’s quixotic rule.
In late February, the UN Security
Council, shocked by Qaddafi’s brutal
response, called for an immediate end to
the violence and unanimously approved
a resolution to impose an arms embargo
on Libya, freeze the assets of key human
rights violators and members of the
Qaddafi family, and refer the Libyan
case to the International Criminal Court.
The ICC eventually charged Qaddafi, his
son Saif al-Islam Qaddafi, and the
military intelligence chief Abdullah alSenussi with crimes against humanity.
The United States also imposed
sanctions of its own and moved to
provide emergency humanitarian aid to
Libyans in need. At the end of February,
I traveled to the UN Human Rights
Council in Geneva to remind the
international community that it had a
responsibility to protect universal rights
and to hold violators accountable. I said
that Qaddafi had “lost the legitimacy to
govern,” and “the people of Libya have
made themselves clear: It is time for
Qaddafi to go—now, without further
violence or delay.” A few days before,
in the same chamber in the Palais des
Nations, the Libyan delegation had
dramatically renounced their allegiance
to Qaddafi and declared their support
for the rebels. “Young people in my
country today are with their blood
writing a new chapter in the history of
struggle and resistance,” one diplomat
said.
A week later the rebels in Benghazi
formed a transitional governing council.
Armed militias across the country made
gains against the regime, including in the
western mountains. But then Qaddafi
unleashed firepower they could not
match. His tanks rolled through town
after town. The resistance started to
crumble, and Qaddafi pledged to hunt
down and exterminate all who opposed
him. The situation was increasingly
desperate. That’s why Jibril was coming
to plead his case.
As I waited for him to arrive, I
thought about Muammar Qaddafi, one of
the most eccentric, cruel, and
unpredictable autocrats in the world. He
cut a bizarre and sometimes chilling
figure on the world stage, with his
colorful outfits, Amazonian bodyguards,
and over-the-top rhetoric. “Those who
do not love me do not deserve to live!”
he once said. Qaddafi seized power in a
coup in 1969 and ruled Libya, a former
Italian colony, with a mix of new-age
socialism, fascism, and personality cult.
Although the country’s oil wealth kept
the regime afloat, his capricious
governance hollowed out Libya’s
economy and institutions.
As a state sponsor of terrorism, client
of the Soviet Union, and proliferator of
weapons of mass destruction, Qaddafi
became a top enemy of the United States
in the 1980s. In 1981, Newsweek put him
on its cover with the headline “The Most
Dangerous Man in the World?”
President Reagan called him the “mad
dog of the Middle East” and bombed
Libya in 1986 in retaliation for a
terrorist attack in Berlin that killed
American citizens, which Qaddafi had
planned. Qaddafi claimed one of his
children died in the air strikes, which
further strained relations.
In 1988, Libyan agents planted the
bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103
over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270
people. Thirty-five of the passengers
killed on that flight were students from
Syracuse University in upstate New
York, and I got to know some of their
families when I represented them in the
U.S. Senate. In my eyes, Qaddafi was a
criminal and a terrorist who could never
be trusted. Many of his Arab neighbors
agreed. Most of them had tangled with
him over the years. At one point he had
even plotted to assassinate the King of
Saudi Arabia.
When Condoleezza Rice met Qaddafi
in Tripoli in 2008, she found him to be
“unstable,” with a “slightly eerie
fascination” with her personally. In 2009
he made a stir in New York when he
spoke at the UN General Assembly for
the first time in his forty-year rule. He
brought along a large Bedouin tent but
was told he could not pitch it in Central
Park. At the UN he was given fifteen
minutes to speak but rambled on for a
full hour and a half. His bizarre diatribe
included rants about the Kennedy
assassination and the possibility that
swine flu was really a biological
weapon designed in a laboratory. He
suggested that Israelis and Palestinians
live together in a single state called
“Isratine” and that the UN move its
headquarters to Libya to reduce jet lag
and avoid the risk of terrorist attacks in
New York. In short, it was a bizarre
performance—but, for Qaddafi, typical.
Despite all this, in recent years
Qaddafi had tried to show the world a
new face, giving up his nuclear program,
mending fences with the international
community, and contributing to the fight
against al Qaeda. Sadly any hope that he
was mellowing into something
resembling a statesman in his old age
evaporated as soon as the protests
started. Then it was back to the old
murderous Qaddafi.
All of this—the defiant dictator, the
attacks on civilians, the perilous
position of the rebels—led me to
consider what many of my foreign
counterparts were debating: Was it time
for the international community to go
beyond humanitarian aid and sanctions
and take decisive action to stop the
violence in Libya? And if yes, what role
should the United States play to advance
and protect our interests?
Just a few days earlier, on March 9, I
had joined the rest of President Obama’s
national security team in the White
House Situation Room to discuss the
crisis in Libya. There was little appetite
for direct U.S. intervention. Defense
Secretary Robert Gates believed that the
United States did not have core national
interests at stake in Libya. The Pentagon
told us that the most talked-about
military option, a no-fly zone like the
one we had maintained in Iraq during the
1990s, was unlikely to be enough to tip
the balance toward the rebels. Qaddafi’s
ground forces were just too strong.
The next day I testified before
Congress and argued that this was not a
time for America to rush unilaterally into
a volatile situation: “I’m one of those
who believes that absent international
authorization, the United States acting
alone would be stepping into a situation
whose consequences are unforeseeable.
And I know that’s the way our military
feels.” Too often, other countries were
quick to demand action but then looked
to America to shoulder all the burdens
and take all the risks. I reminded
Congress, “We had a no-fly zone over
Iraq. It did not prevent Saddam Hussein
from slaughtering people on the ground,
and it did not get him out of office.”
Retired General Wesley Clark, an old
friend who led the NATO air war in
Kosovo in the 1990s, summed up the
argument against intervention in an oped in the Washington Post on March 11:
“Whatever resources we dedicate for a
no-fly zone would probably be too little,
too late. We would once again be
committing our military to force regime
change in a Muslim land, even though
we can’t quite bring ourselves to say it.
So let’s recognize that the basic
requirements for successful intervention
simply don’t exist, at least not yet: We
don’t have a clearly stated objective,
legal authority, committed international
support or adequate on-the-scene
military capabilities, and Libya’s
politics hardly foreshadow a clear
outcome.”
The very next day a development in
Cairo began to change the calculus.
After more than five hours of
deliberation and debate, the Arab
League, representing twenty-one Middle
Eastern nations, voted to request that the
UN Security Council impose a no-fly
zone in Libya. The Arab League had
previously suspended the Qaddafi
government’s membership, and now it
recognized the rebel council as the
legitimate representative of the Libyan
people. These were major steps by an
organization previously known as a club
for autocrats and oil barons. One of the
prime movers was the Egyptian diplomat
Amr Moussa, who was serving as the
Arab League’s Secretary-General but
had his eye on the upcoming Presidential
elections in Egypt. This no-fly zone
resolution was, in part, his bid for
support from the revolutionary factions
that had helped drive out Mubarak. The
Gulf monarchs went along, in part to
show their own restive populations that
they were on the side of change. And, of
course, they all hated Qaddafi.
If the Arabs were willing to take the
lead, perhaps an international
intervention was not impossible after
all. Certainly it would put pressure on
Russia and China, who might otherwise
be expected to veto any Western-backed
action at the UN Security Council. But
the Arab League statement used the term
humanitarian action and did not
explicitly mention military force. I
wondered if Amr Moussa and the others
were really prepared to back what it
would take to stop Qaddafi from
massacring his people.
AbZ, the Foreign Minister of the
UAE, a powerful behind-the-scenes
player at the Arab League, was in Paris
when I arrived. We met in my hotel
before the G-8 dinner, and I pressed him
on how far the Arab commitment went.
Were they prepared to see foreign
planes dropping bombs on Libya? Even
more important, were they prepared to
fly some of those planes themselves?
From the Emiratis, at least, the answer to
both questions was a surprising yes.
The Europeans were even more gung
ho. I got an earful about military
intervention from Sarkozy. He is a
dynamic figure, always full of ebullient
energy, who loves being at the center of
the action. France, a former colonial
power in North Africa, had been close
to Ben Ali in Tunisia, and the revolution
there had caught Sarkozy flat-footed. The
French had not been players in Egypt. So
this was their chance to jump into the
fray supporting the Arab Spring,
demonstrating that they too were on the
side of change. Sarkozy was also
influenced by the French public
intellectual Bernard-Henri Lévy, who
had hitched a ride in a vegetable truck
from the Egyptian border to see for
himself what was happening. They were
both genuinely moved by the plight of the
Libyan people suffering at the hands of a
brutal dictator, and they made a
persuasive case that something had to be
done.
When I saw British Foreign Secretary
William Hague at dinner that night, he
pressed the case for action. If Hague
thought military action in Libya was
necessary, that counted for a lot. I knew
that he, like me, was wary of making
such decisions without confidence in the
rationale, strategy, and endgame.
Back at the hotel I met with our
Ambassador to Libya, Gene Cretz, and
our newly appointed Special
Representative to the Libyan rebels,
Chris Stevens, who had earlier served
as Deputy Chief of Mission and Chargé
d’affaires in Tripoli. Cretz was a
colorful character, a brash and funny
diplomat from upstate New York. When
his secret cables to Washington
describing Qaddafi’s excesses were
published by WikiLeaks, Cretz had
faced threats and intimidation in Tripoli,
and in late December 2010, I made the
decision to bring him back to
Washington for his own safety. By late
February 2011, with the revolution
heating up, our remaining diplomatic
staff evacuated. Many left on a ferry to
Malta that hit unusually high and heavy
seas, but thankfully everyone made it to
safety.
Stevens was another talented diplomat
with long experience in the region. A
blond-haired, charismatic Californian
who spoke both French and Arabic, he
had served in Syria, Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, and Jerusalem. Chris devoured
old Libyan histories and memoirs and
delighted in sharing obscure historical
trivia and cracking jokes in the local
dialect. I asked Chris to return to Libya
to make contact with the rebel council in
their stronghold of Benghazi. It was a
challenging and dangerous mission, but
America needed to be represented there.
Chris agreed and accepted the
assignment. His mother liked to say that
he had sand in his shoes, always moving
and running and working, seeking out
new challenges and adventures across
the Middle East. After years of
experience in the field, he understood
that the difficult and dangerous places
are where America’s interests are most
at stake and where it’s most important
that we’re represented with skilled and
subtle diplomacy. Later in the spring he
and a very small team arrived in
Benghazi on board a Greek cargo ship,
like a 19th-century envoy, and got right
to work building relationships with the
civilian and military leaders of the
rebellion. He did such an impressive job
I would later ask the President to
nominate him to succeed Cretz as our
Ambassador to Libya.
Finally, around 10 P.M., Jibril arrived
at the Westin in Paris accompanied by
Bernard-Henri Lévy, who had helped
arrange the meeting. They made quite a
pair, the rebel and the philosopher. Hard
to tell who was who. Jibril appeared
more like a technocrat than a firebrand.
He was small and bespectacled, with
thinning hair and a stern demeanor.
Lévy, by contrast, cut a dramatic and
stylish figure, with long wavy hair and
his shirt open practically down to his
navel. He has been quoted as saying,
“God is dead but my hair is perfect.”
(To that I’d say, I think God is alive, but
I’d love to have perfect hair!)
I found Jibril to be impressive and
polished, especially for the
representative of a rebel council on the
verge of annihilation. He had served as
head of the National Economic
Development Board under Qaddafi
before defecting to join the revolution
and seemed to understand how much
work would be necessary to rebuild a
country devastated by decades of cruelty
and mismanagement. He told us that
hundreds of thousands of civilians in
Benghazi were in imminent danger as the
regime’s forces marched toward the city,
raising the specters of the genocide in
Rwanda and ethnic cleansing in the
Balkans. He pleaded for international
intervention.
As Jibril spoke, I tried to take his
measure. We had learned the hard way
in Iraq and elsewhere that it’s one thing
to remove a dictator and another
altogether to help a competent and
credible government take his place. If
the United States agreed to intervene in
Libya, we would be making a big bet on
this political scientist and his
colleagues. Over four decades Qaddafi
had systematically removed anyone who
might pose a threat to his rule and
pulverized Libya’s institutions and
political culture. So we were unlikely to
find a perfect George Washington
waiting in the wings. All things
considered, Jibril and those he
represented might well be the best we
could hope for.
Afterward I reported to the White
House what I had heard in Paris and my
progress with our international partners.
Our NATO allies were prepared to take
the lead in any military action. The Arab
League would support it, and some
would even actively participate in
combat operations against an Arab
neighbor—a telling sign of how far
Qaddafi had gone. I believed we could
wrangle the votes in the Security
Council to back a strong resolution. We
had managed to get the Russians and
Chinese on board with tough sanctions
against North Korea and Iran in 2009
and 2010, and I believed we could do
the same now. And, based on my
meeting with Jibril, I thought there was a
reasonable chance the rebels would turn
out to be credible partners.
The National Security Council
remained divided on the wisdom of
intervening in Libya. Some, including
UN Ambassador Susan Rice and
National Security Council aide
Samantha Power, argued that we had a
responsibility to protect civilians and
prevent a massacre if we could. Defense
Secretary Gates was firmly opposed. A
veteran of the conflicts in Iraq and
Afghanistan and a realist about the limits
of American power, he did not think our
interests in Libya justified the sacrifice.
We all knew the consequences of
intervention were unpredictable. But
Qaddafi’s troops were now a hundred
miles from Benghazi and closing fast.
We were looking at a humanitarian
catastrophe, with untold thousands at
risk of being killed. If we were going to
stop it, we had to act now.
The President decided to move
forward with drawing up military plans
and securing a UN Security Council
resolution. But there were two key
stipulations. First, because the Pentagon
had assured us that a no-fly zone by
itself would be little more than a
symbolic gesture, we would need to
secure UN backing for more robust
military action if necessary: the authority
to use “all necessary measures” to
protect civilians. Second, the President
wanted to keep U.S. involvement
limited, so our allies would have to
shoulder much of the burden and fly most
of the sorties. These conditions would
require extensive additional diplomacy,
but Susan and I both thought it was
possible and started working the phones.
The next day at the Security Council
in New York, the Russians offered a
weak resolution calling for a cease-fire
that I thought was actually a ploy to
muddy the waters and blunt the building
momentum for a no-fly zone. Unless we
could convince them not to veto our
stronger resolution, it was dead in the
water. Beyond Russia, we were also
concerned about China, which had veto
power as well, and several
nonpermanent members.
On the morning of March 15, I flew
from Paris to Cairo to meet with Amr
Moussa and emphasize how important it
was that the Arab League come out
strongly for military intervention and
agree to actively participate. This policy
had to be recognized as being driven by
Libya’s neighbors, not the West, or it
wasn’t going to work. Moussa confirmed
that Qatar and the UAE were prepared to
contribute planes and pilots to the effort,
a major step forward. Later Jordan
would step up as well. I knew this
support would make it easier to
convince wavering Security Council
members in New York.
Qaddafi made our job easier when he
went on television on March 17 and
warned the citizens of Benghazi, “We
are coming tonight, and there will be no
mercy.” He pledged to go house by
house looking for “traitors” and told
Libyans to “capture the rats.” By then I
was in Tunisia and called Russian
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. He had
previously told me that Russia was dead
set against a no-fly zone, but since then
several nonpermanent members of the
Security Council had gotten on board
with our resolution. Now it was
important to assure the Russians that this
would not be like Iraq or Afghanistan
and to be clear about our intentions. “We
don’t want another war,” I told Lavrov.
“We don’t want to put troops on the
ground.” But, I explained, “Our goal is
to protect civilians from brutal and
indiscriminate attacks. The no-fly zone
is necessary, but insufficient. We need
additional measures. Time is critical.”
“I take your point about not seeking
another war,” he responded. “But that
doesn’t mean that you won’t get one.”
However, he added, the Russians had no
interest in protecting Qaddafi or seeing
him slaughter his people. I explained that
our resolution would incorporate the
Russian proposal for a cease-fire, but
that it had to also authorize a forceful
response if Qaddafi refused to stop his
advance. “We can’t vote in favor,”
Lavrov said. “But we will abstain and it
will pass.” That was all we needed. In
this context an abstention was nearly as
good as a yes vote. In later discussions,
especially about Syria, Lavrov claimed
he had been misled about our intentions.
That struck me as disingenuous since
Lavrov, as a former Ambassador to the
UN, knew as well as anyone what “all
necessary measures” meant.
Next I called Luís Amado, the Foreign
Minister of Portugal, a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. Even if
we avoided a veto, we still needed to be
sure we had a majority, and the more
votes we got, the stronger the message to
Qaddafi would be. “I wanted to reiterate
that the United States has no interest, or
intention, or planning of any kind of
using ground troops or a ground
operation,” I told Amado. “We believe
passing this resolution will give a big
wake-up call to Qaddafi and the people
around him. This could clearly influence
the actions that he takes in the next
days.” He listened to my arguments and
then agreed to vote yes. “Don’t worry,
we’ll be there,” he told me.
President Obama called South African
President Jacob Zuma and made the
same case to him. Susan lobbied her
counterparts in New York. The French
and British were working hard as well.
In the end the final vote was 10 to 0,
with five abstentions; Brazil, India,
China, and Germany joined Russia in
sitting out the vote. We now had a strong
mandate to protect Libyan civilians with
“all necessary measures.”
Almost immediately, there were
difficulties and drama.
President Obama was very clear with
our team and our allies that the United
States would participate in a military
operation to enforce the UN resolution,
but only in a limited way. A key first
step for enforcing a no-fly zone would
be knocking out Qaddafi’s air defense
system, and the United States was better
equipped to do that than any of our
partners. But the President wanted allied
air forces to take the lead as soon as
possible, and he was adamant that there
would be no U.S. troops deployed. “No
boots on the ground” became a mantra.
All of that meant that we needed a broad
and well-coordinated international
coalition that could step in and take over
after U.S. cruise missiles and bombers
cleared the way. I soon found out that
getting all our allies to work together as
a team on this would be harder than any
of us anticipated.
Sarkozy was eager to take the lead. In
the run-up to the UN vote, he had been
the most vocal advocate for international
military action, and now he saw his
chance to reassert France’s role as a
major world power. He invited a wide
range of European and Arab nations to
Paris for an emergency summit on
Saturday, March 19, to discuss
implementation of the UN resolution.
Conspicuously not invited, however,
was our NATO ally Turkey. There were
already tensions between Sarkozy and
Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan because
of France’s objections to Turkey joining
the EU. Then Erdoğan had emerged as a
voice of caution on Libya, and Sarkozy
worked to exclude him from the
coalition. The snub infuriated Erdoğan
and turned him even more decidedly
against intervention.
When I spoke with Turkish Foreign
Minister Davutoğlu I tried to ease some
of the hurt feelings. “I first want to tell
you that I pushed very hard for you to be
invited,” I said. As I feared, Davutoğlu
was quite upset. “We are expecting
action through NATO and suddenly in
Paris, there is a meeting and we are not
invited,” he complained, with good
reason. Was this a French crusade or an
international coalition? I explained that
the summit had been organized by the
French but that we were pushing hard for
the military operation itself to be run by
NATO.
In Paris I delivered President
Obama’s message about our expectation
that others would step up. Just after
landing, I checked in by phone with
AbZ. As described earlier, this turned
into a very difficult conversation, as he
threatened to pull the UAE out of the
Libya operation because of U.S.
criticism of their actions in Bahrain.
Then, before the official meeting even
began, Sarkozy pulled me and British
Prime Minister David Cameron aside
and confided that French warplanes
were already headed toward Libya.
When the larger group found out that
France had jumped the gun, it caused an
uproar. Italian Prime Minister Silvio
Berlusconi, who was just as strongwilled and eager for the spotlight as
Sarkozy, was particularly incensed.
There is an informal belief that old
colonial powers should take the lead in
addressing crises in their former
dominions. That’s why, later, France
was the one to send troops to Mali and
the Central African Republic. In the case
of Libya, a former Italian colony,
Berlusconi felt that Italy should be out
front, not France. What’s more, because
of its strategic location jutting out into
the Mediterranean, Italy provided the
natural launching pad for most of the air
sorties into Libya. It had already started
opening a number of air force bases to
allied jets. Now Berlusconi felt
upstaged by Sarkozy, and he threatened
to walk out of the coalition and close
access to his country’s bases.
Beyond the bruised egos, though,
Berlusconi and others had good reason
to be concerned. We had learned in the
Balkans and Afghanistan that
coordinating a multinational military
operation is complicated. Unless there
are clear lines of command and control,
with everyone working together to
implement the same strategy, it can
devolve into dangerous confusion.
Imagine if a dozen different nations sent
warplanes to Libya without coordinating
with one another on flight plans, targets,
and rules of engagement. It would be
pandemonium in the sky, with the real
possibility of a mishap resulting in the
loss of life.
Because we had the most capabilities,
the United States started out in the lead
coordinating role. The next logical step
was to have NATO organize the
intervention. The Alliance already had
an integrated military command and
experience coordinating in previous
conflicts. Sarkozy did not like that idea.
For starters, it might mean less glory for
France. But he also thought making
Libya a NATO mission would alienate
the Arab world, whose leadership had
helped sway opinion before the UN
vote. Qatar and the UAE had pledged to
send planes to help enforce the no-fly
zone—would they do so under the
banner of NATO? What’s more, NATO
operates by consensus, which means any
one member, including Turkey, could
block action. We had worked very hard
at the UN to secure language authorizing
“all necessary measures” to protect
civilians so that we could do more than
prevent Qaddafi’s planes from attacking
rebel towns—it was crucial that we be
able to stop his tanks and troops on the
ground before they reached Benghazi.
Some called that a “no-drive zone.” But
Erdoğan and others were drawing the
line at a pure no-fly zone with no air-toground strikes. Sarkozy feared that if
NATO ran the mission, we would end
up watching as Benghazi burned.
The Paris meeting ended without an
agreement on what should happen after
the initial American-led phase of
intervention. But with Qaddafi’s forces
on the move and French jets already in
the air, there was no time for hesitation.
I went before the cameras and
announced, “America has unique
capabilities and we will bring them to
bear to help our European and Canadian
allies and Arab partners stop further
violence against civilians, including
through the effective implementation of a
no-fly zone.” A few hours later U.S.
Navy warships in the Mediterranean
fired more than a hundred cruise
missiles, targeting air defense systems
inside Libya and at a large column of
armored vehicles approaching Benghazi.
President Obama, who was traveling in
Brazil, said, “I want the American
people to know that the use of force is
not our first choice and it’s not a choice
that I make lightly.” But, he went on,
“actions have consequences, and the
writ of the international community must
be enforced. That is the cause of this
coalition.”
Over the next seventy-two hours
Libya’s air defenses were successfully
destroyed and the people of Benghazi
were saved from imminent devastation.
President Obama was later unfairly
criticized as “leading from behind” in
Libya. That’s a silly phrase. It took a
great deal of leading—from the front, the
side, and every other direction, to
authorize and accomplish the mission
and to prevent what might have been the
loss of tens of thousands of lives. No
one else could have played the role we
did, both in terms of the military
capability to land a decisive first blow
against Qaddafi’s forces and the
diplomatic capacity to build and hold
together a broad coalition.
Unfortunately relations inside the
Alliance went from bad to worse over
the next few days. On Monday, only two
days after the Paris summit,
representatives gathered at NATO
headquarters in Brussels to try to work
out the differences. But the meeting soon
descended into acrimony, with the
French Ambassador storming out of the
room. Both sides were doubling down.
As feared, the Turks were insisting on
narrow parameters for a NATO mission,
and the French were refusing to give up
control. On Monday evening President
Obama called Erdoğan to explain again
the importance of “all necessary
measures” and underscore that this
would not include sending ground forces
for an invasion. He later spoke to
Sarkozy, who was willing to let NATO
take over the no-fly zone if the French,
British, and others could continue the
more aggressive no-drive zone on their
own. From our perspective, setting up
two parallel missions was fraught with
potential difficulties. But we agreed
with Sarkozy that we couldn’t give up
the ability to target Qaddafi’s ground
forces, as they threatened to exterminate
rebel communities.
On Monday night a terrifying incident
heightened the stakes for all of us. An F15 Strike Eagle fighter piloted by two
U.S. airmen, Major Kenneth Harney and
Captain Tyler Stark, suffered a
mechanical failure over eastern Libya
around midnight. Just after dropping a
five-hundred-pound bomb on their
target, the jet went into a tailspin. The
two airmen ejected, but a tear in Stark’s
parachute sent him off course. Harney
was rescued soon afterward by a U.S.
search-and-rescue team, but Stark was
missing. I was worried sick thinking
about this twenty-seven-year-old from
Littleton, Colorado, lost in the Libyan
desert.
Amazingly Stark was found by
friendly Libyan rebels from Benghazi,
who called a local English teacher to
come and talk to him. It turned out the
teacher, Bubaker Habib, had close ties
to the staff of the U.S. Embassy. Our
staff had all left the country, but Bubaker
kept their numbers and was able to reach
the State Department Operations Center.
Over the course of a call with Ops, with
State relaying information to the
Pentagon, Stark’s rescue was arranged.
In the meantime Bubaker drove him to a
hotel in Benghazi, where he was treated
by doctors for torn tendons in his knee
and ankle. Bubaker later told Vanity
Fair that he instructed the rebels, “We
have an American pilot here. If he gets
caught or killed it’s the end of the
mission. Make sure he is safe and
sound.” The Libyans thanked Stark
profusely, expressing their gratitude for
the U.S. intervention that was protecting
them from Qaddafi’s troops.
In Washington all of us let out a huge
sigh of relief. At the same time, I was
beginning to see the contours of a
possible compromise that might break
the deadlock among our allies. If Turkey
agreed not to veto action to enforce the
no-drive zone—it didn’t have to
participate, just abstain from blocking it
—then we could convince France to
give NATO full command and control.
NATO Secretary-General Anders
Fogh Rasmussen reported to me that he
had spoken to the Turks and had heard
that the Arabs would not object to
participating in a NATO-led mission,
which was one of Sarkozy’s big
concerns. As it turns out, AbZ happened
to be in Davutoğlu’s office in Ankara
when Rasmussen called. Davutoğlu
handed the phone over to the Emirati and
let him express his consent directly.
Word from Qatar and the Arab League
was also positive. “Did you share that
with France?” I asked Rasmussen. He
replied, “Their response was that it’s
one thing what the Arabs say in private
and another thing what they do publicly.”
I said I would talk with Davutoğlu
myself and see if we could get the Arabs
to go on the record with their support.
When I reached Davutoğlu, I stressed
that the United States agreed that NATO
should now take over command and
control. “We want the handover to be as
smooth as possible. We need a unified
command in a single theater of
operations. We need to ensure all
aspects including the civilian protection
mission are integrated.” That meant
having both the no-fly zone and the no-
drive zone. Davutoğlu agreed. “There
should be one command and control and
it should be under NATO,” he said. “It’s
important for the people of Libya. If
there is a UN umbrella and under that
NATO is doing the operation no one
will see this as crusaders or East versus
West.”
I also called French Foreign Minister,
Alain Juppé. “I think we are ready to
accept the compromise under certain
conditions,” he told me. If NATO was
going to run the military operation,
France wanted to set up a separate
diplomatic committee made up of all the
nations contributing forces, including the
Arabs, to provide policy guidance. It
was a modest gesture, I thought, and one
we should be able to accommodate.
To seal the deal, I convened a
conference call with the French, Turks,
and British. “I believe we have an
understanding among us. But I just want
to be sure. It’s crucial we’re all on the
same page on NATO’s responsibility to
enforce the no-fly zone and protect
civilians in Libya.” Then I carefully
walked through the compromise. By the
end of the call, we were all in
agreement. “Bravo!” exclaimed Juppé as
we hung up.
Soon NATO assumed formal
command and control of what became
known as Operation Unified Protector.
The United States continued to provide
vital intelligence and surveillance
information that helped guide the air
strikes, as well as midair refueling that
allowed allied aircraft to stay in the
skies over Libya for long stretches of
time. But the vast majority of combat
sorties would be flown by others.
The military campaign in Libya lasted
longer than any of us had hoped or
expected, although we never went down
the slippery slope of putting troops on
the ground, as some had feared. At times
the coalition frayed and there was a fair
amount of hand-holding and arm-twisting
needed to keep all our partners on
board. But by late summer 2011, the
rebels had pushed back the regime’s
forces. They captured Tripoli toward the
end of August, and Qaddafi and his
family fled into the desert. The
revolution had succeeded, and the hard
work of building a new country could
begin.

In mid-October, with Tripoli liberated
but Qaddafi still on the loose, I decided
to visit Libya myself to offer America’s
support to the new transitional
government. With the country awash in
shoulder-fired surface-to-air missiles, it
was too dangerous to fly our usual blueand-white 757 with “The United States
of America” emblazoned from tip to tail,
so the Air Force provided a C-17
military transport plane equipped with
defensive countermeasures for the
morning flight from Malta to Tripoli.
Just before we took off, a
photographer for Time magazine, Diana
Walker, saw me checking my
BlackBerry and snapped a quick shot.
Her photo, to everyone’s surprise,
became an internet sensation many
months later and the basis for a “meme”
known as “Texts from Hillary.” The idea
was simple: an internet user would pair
the photo of me holding my phone with a
picture of another famous person holding
a phone and add funny captions to
narrate the texts we supposedly sent
back and forth. The first one posted
showed President Obama lounging on a
couch, with the caption “Hey Hil,
Watchu doing?” The imagined response
from me: “Running the world.”
Eventually I decided to get in on the fun
myself. I submitted my own version full
of internet slang: “ROFL @ ur tumblr!
g2g—scrunchie time. ttyl?” That roughly
translated to “Love your site.” I also
invited the creators of Texts from
Hillary, two young PR professionals in
Washington named Adam Smith and
Stacy Lambe, to visit me at the State
Department. We posed for a photograph
of all three of us checking our phones at
the same time.
At the time Walker took that photo,
however, fun was the furthest thing from
my mind. I was preparing for what
promised to be a grueling day in a wartorn capital with a new government that
had little hold on power and even less
experience running a country.
After landing safely, the door of the
C-17 opened and I looked out from the
top of the plane’s stairs and saw a
crowd of armed and bearded militia
fighters waiting below. They were from
Zintan, a battle-scarred town in Libya’s
mountainous northwest that had been one
of the major flash points of the
revolution. Under the uneasy powersharing arrangement between the various
militias now in control of Tripoli, the
Zintan brigade had responsibility for the
airport. My security detail was as
nervous as I had ever seen them. I took a
deep breath and started to walk down
the stairs. To my surprise the militia
fighters started chanting, “God is Great!”
and “USA!” They waved and cheered
and held up their hands in the “V for
victory” sign. Soon I was mobbed by
these exuberant and exultant men from
the mountains. Several handed their
automatic rifles to comrades to hold
while they squeezed next to me for a
picture; others patted my back or shook
my hand. Kurt Olsson, the head of my
security detail, remained unflappable,
but I imagine he came away with a few
new gray hairs.
The men took their guns and piled into
SUVs and pickup trucks mounted with
heavy weapons and escorted my
motorcade through the city, aggressively
boxing out other traffic and waving
excitedly whenever they were alongside
my car. The streets of Tripoli were
covered with revolutionary graffiti,
some lampooning Qaddafi and others
celebrating rebel slogans and victories.
Soon we arrived at the offices of a large
Islamic charity that the new government
was using as its makeshift headquarters.
After meeting with the Chairman of
the National Transitional Council of
Libya, Mustafa Abdul Jalil, I made my
way to the office of Jibril, the rebel
leader I had met in Paris who was now
the interim Prime Minister. He greeted
me with a broad smile, and I said, “I am
proud to stand here on the soil of a free
Libya.”
In meetings with Jalil and Jibril we
discussed the many challenges facing the
new government. At the top of their list
was the continuing threat from Qaddafi
and his loyalists. I assured them that
NATO would continue its mission to
protect Libyan civilians until the former
dictator was found and fully defeated.
Then I raised another concern.
Any government’s first responsibility
is to provide security and ensure law
and order. This was going to be a big
challenge in Libya. Unlike in Egypt,
where the military and security forces
had remained largely intact after the fall
of Mubarak, in Libya there was now a
major vacuum. And, as friendly and
high-spirited as the militia fighters from
Zintan had been, the presence of so many
independent armed groups in Tripoli and
across the country was not sustainable. It
was crucial to bring all the militias
together in a single army under the
control of civilian authorities, establish
the rule of law, prevent score-settling
and vigilante justice, and round up the
loose weapons now flooding the
country. The United States was prepared
to help the new government in all these
areas, but it was going to take leadership
from them to make it work. Jibril and the
others nodded in agreement and pledged
to make it a priority.
After our meetings I sped off to a
town hall discussion with students and
civil society activists at Tripoli
University. Qaddafi had done all that he
could to discourage the emergence of
volunteer groups, NGOs, independent
media, and government watchdogs that
make up civil society. I hoped they were
willing and able to play a positive role
in Libya’s next phase. History had
shown that it was one thing to remove a
tyrant and quite another to build a new
government that delivers for its people.
Democracy would face serious
challenges in Libya. Would the country’s
future be shaped by the arms of its
militias or the aspirations of its people?
One after another, the students and
activists stood up and asked thoughtful
and practical questions about how to
build a new democracy. “We have no
political parties,” observed one young
woman studying to become an engineer.
She asked how Libyans should
“encourage our people to involve more
in the political life, considering that we
have elections in a matter of two years
or less and we have to elect our
parliaments and our president.” Another
young woman, a medical student, stood
up. “We are very new to this
democracy,” she began. “What steps do
you think we can take to root the
freedom of speech into the Libyan
identity?” These young people
desperately wanted to live in a “normal
country,” with access to the global
economy and all the rights they knew
people in America and around the world
had enjoyed for so long. And, in contrast
to some of the young people I had met
next door in Egypt, they were eager to
put aside their differences, learn lessons
from the outside, and get involved in the
political process. Free Libya had a long
way to go—they were starting basically
from scratch—but these young people
impressed me with their thoughtfulness
and determination to build it.
Before leaving Tripoli I stopped by a
local hospital to visit with civilians and
fighters wounded in the revolution
against Qaddafi. I talked with young men
who had lost limbs and doctors and
nurses overwhelmed by the casualties
they had seen. I promised that the United
States would provide medical support
and even fly some of the most
challenging cases to hospitals in
America.
My final visit was to the compound of
our Ambassador to Libya, Gene Cretz,
which had been turned into a makeshift
embassy. During the revolution, regime
thugs had ransacked and burned our
actual embassy (all U.S. personnel had
already evacuated), so now our returned
diplomatic staff was camped out in
Gene’s living room. I marveled at the
toughness and resolve of these brave
American diplomats. We heard gunshots
in the distance, and I wondered whether
it was fighting or celebration. The
embassy staff seemed quite used to it by
now. As I shook each of their hands, I
thanked them for all their incredible
work and sacrifices.
Leaving Tripoli, the C-17 lifted off
steep and fast. So much had happened in
the nine months since I went to Doha to
warn the leaders of the Middle East that
if they did not embrace reform their
region was going to sink into the sand.
Libya held its first elections in the
summer of 2012. By all accounts,
despite security concerns, the voting was
well run and relatively free of
irregularities. After more than forty
years without political participation
under Qaddafi, about 60 percent of
Libyans, a broad cross-section of
society, went to the polls to elect their
representatives and then took to the
streets in celebration.
I was worried that the challenges
ahead would prove overwhelming for
even the most well-meaning transitional
leaders. If the new government could
consolidate its authority, provide
security, use oil revenues to rebuild,
disarm the militias, and keep extremists
out, then Libya would have a fighting
chance at building a stable democracy. If
not, then the country would face very
difficult challenges translating the hopes
of a revolution into a free, secure, and
prosperous future. And, as we soon
learned, not only Libyans would suffer if
they failed.
17

Benghazi: Under Attack

On September 11, 2012, Ambassador
Chris Stevens and Information
Management Officer Sean Smith were
killed in a terrorist attack on our
diplomatic compound in Benghazi,
Libya. Two CIA officers, Glen Doherty
and Tyrone Woods, were killed hours
later during an attack on the Agency’s
nearby compound.
Sean Smith had joined the State
Department after six years in the Air
Force and served for a decade at our
embassies and consulates in Pretoria,
Baghdad, Montreal, and The Hague.
Tyrone Woods was known to his
friends in the Navy SEALs and later the
CIA as “Rone.” He served multiple
tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. In addition
to being an experienced combat veteran,
he also earned distinction as a registered
nurse and certified paramedic. He and
his wife, Dorothy, had three sons,
including one born just a few months
before he died.
Glen Doherty, who went by “Bub,”
was a former SEAL as well and an
experienced paramedic. He too had
deployed to some of the most dangerous
places on earth, including Iraq and
Afghanistan, always putting his life on
the line to safeguard other Americans.
Both Tyrone and Glen had committed
their skills and experience to protecting
CIA personnel in Libya.
Ambassador Chris Stevens, the only
one of the four I had the privilege of
knowing personally, was a talented
diplomat and an engaging and
extraordinarily warm human being.
When I asked him in the spring of 2011
to undertake the dangerous mission to
make contact with the Libyan rebel
leadership in Benghazi during the
revolution, and later to return to Libya as
Ambassador after the fall of Qaddafi, he
quickly accepted. Chris understood the
risks and recognized how challenging it
would be to help pull together a
shattered country, but he knew that
America had vital national security
interests at stake. His long experience in
the region and talent for delicate
diplomacy made him a natural choice.
Losing these fearless public servants
in the line of duty was a crushing blow.
As Secretary I was the one ultimately
responsible for my people’s safety, and I
never felt that responsibility more
deeply than I did that day.
Sending those who serve our nation
into harm’s way is one of the hardest
choices our country and leaders ever
have to make. Far and away my greatest
regret from those years is that not all of
them returned home safely. I often think
about the families who lost loved ones
serving our country. The gravity of the
mission and the gratitude of our nation
may provide some solace, but in the end
there is nothing any of us can say or do
to fill the holes left behind.
The truest way to honor them is to
improve our ability to protect those who
carry on their work and prevent future
losses.

From my first day leading the State
Department, I was aware that terrorists
could strike any of our more than 270
diplomatic posts around the world. It
had happened too many times before,
and those hell-bent on attacking America
would never stop trying. In 1979, fiftytwo American diplomats were taken
hostage in Iran and held captive for 444
days. The Hezbollah attacks on our
embassy and Marine barracks in Beirut
in 1983 killed 258 Americans and more
than a hundred others. In 1998, al Qaeda
bombed our embassies in Kenya and
Tanzania, killing more than two hundred
people, including twelve Americans. I
vividly remember standing next to Bill at
Andrews Air Force Base when the
remains of those who had fallen returned
home.
All told, terrorists have killed sixty-
six American diplomatic personnel since
the 1970s and more than a hundred
contractors and locally employed staff.
Four U.S. Ambassadors were murdered
in terrorist attacks between 1973 and
1979 alone. Since 2001 there have been
more than one hundred assaults on U.S.
diplomatic facilities around the world
and nearly two dozen direct attacks on
diplomatic personnel. In 2004, gunmen
killed nine people, including five locally
employed staff in an attack on our
consulate in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. In
May 2009, a roadside bomb in Iraq
killed Terry Barnich, the Deputy
Director of our Transition Assistance
Team. In March 2010, Lesley Enriquez,
a pregnant twenty-five-year-old consular
officer in Juarez, Mexico, was shot to
death, along with her husband. In August
2012, USAID officer Ragaei Said
Abdelfattah was killed by a suicide
bomber in Afghanistan. As of 2014, 244
of America’s diplomats have fallen in
our nation’s history while serving
overseas.
Diplomacy, by its very nature, must
often be practiced in dangerous places
where America’s national security hangs
in the balance. We have to weigh the
imperatives of our national security
against the sacrifices required to
safeguard it. As Secretary of State I was
responsible for nearly seventy thousand
employees, and I deeply admired those
who volunteered to accept the risks that
come with carrying our flag where it is
needed most. Every day as they walk
into work the men and women of the
State Department pass the names of
those 244 fallen diplomats inscribed in
marble in the lobby of the Harry S
Truman Building. It’s a constant
reminder of the risks that come with
representing the United States around the
world. I was heartened—though not
surprised—to learn from the Department
that after major attacks against the
United States, applications to the
Foreign Service went up. People want to
serve our country, even when it means
being in harm’s way. Nothing speaks
more to the character and dedication of
those who represent our country around
the world.
The events of September 2012, and
the choices made in the days and weeks
before and since, throw into sharp relief
some of the toughest dilemmas of
American foreign policy—and the
heartbreaking human stakes of every
decision we make. Our diplomats must
balance the necessity of engaging in
difficult and dangerous settings with the
need to stay safe and secure. As a
country, we have to do more to protect
them, without preventing them from
doing their important jobs. We need to
stay open to the world in a time when
any provocation can spark antiAmerican riots across the globe and farflung terrorist groups continue to plot
new attacks. Ultimately these challenges
boil down to this: Are we willing to
shoulder the burdens of American
leadership in a perilous age?
Part of the answer came from the
independent investigation into the
Benghazi attacks, which noted, “The
total elimination of risk is a non-starter
for U.S. diplomacy, given the need for
the U.S. government to be present in
places where stability and security are
often most profoundly lacking and host
government support is sometimes
minimal to non-existent.”
While we can and must work to
reduce the danger, the only way to
eliminate risk entirely is to retreat
entirely and to accept the consequences
of the void we leave behind. When
America is absent, extremism takes root,
our interests suffer, and our security at
home is threatened. There are some who
believe that is the better choice; I am not
one of them. Retreat is not the answer; it
won’t make the world a safer place, and
it’s just not in our country’s DNA. When
faced with setbacks and tragedies,
Americans have always worked harder
and smarter. We strive to learn from our
mistakes and avoid repeating them. And
we do not shrink from the challenges
ahead. That is what we must continue to
do.
The events of that September occurred
in what is often called the “fog of war,”
with information hard to come by, and
conflicting or incomplete reports making
it difficult to tell what was actually
happening on the ground, especially
from thousands of miles away in
Washington. To a frustrating degree, that
fog persisted so long, in part because of
continuing turmoil in Libya. And despite
the best efforts of officials from across
our government—including the White
House, the State Department, the
military, the intelligence community, the
FBI, an independent Accountability
Review Board, and eight Congressional
committees—there will never be perfect
clarity on everything that happened. It is
unlikely that there will ever be anything
close to full agreement on exactly what
happened that night, how it happened, or
why it happened. But that should not be
confused with a lack of effort to
discover the truth or to share it with the
American people. I am grateful to the
many dedicated professionals who have
worked tirelessly to answer all the
questions they could to the best of their
abilities.
What follows is based on a
combination of my own personal
experience and information learned over
the following days, weeks, and months
thanks to several exhaustive
investigations, especially the work of the
independent review board charged with
determining the facts and pulling no
punches. While there has been a
regrettable amount of misinformation,
speculation, and flat-out deceit by some
in politics and the media, more than a
year later in-depth reporting from a
number of reputable sources continues to
expand our understanding of these
events.

While the morning of September 11,
2012, began like many others, there are
few dates as meaningful to our country.
On every 9/11 since 2001, I think back
to that terrible day. I was not even a year
into representing New York in the
Senate when it was devastated by the
attacks on the Twin Towers. That day,
which started with hundreds fleeing
down the stairs of the Capitol Building
and ended with hundreds of members
standing on those very same steps
singing “God Bless America” in a
moving display of unity, shaped my
unrelenting focus on helping New York
recover and securing it against future
attacks. With those memories flooding
back, I left home for the State
Department.
After the short drive to the office, the
first order of business, as always, was to
receive the daily briefing on intelligence
and national security developments,
including the latest reports of terrorist
threats around the world. This briefing is
given every day to senior officials
across our government. It is prepared by
a team of dedicated career intelligence
analysts who work overnight before
fanning out across Washington before
dawn every morning to hand-deliver and
orally present their reports.
The past few months had been a
tumultuous time across the Middle East
and North Africa. The civil war in Syria
was escalating, sending refugees
streaming into Jordan and Turkey. In
Egypt the ascension of the Muslim
Brotherhood and tensions with the
military raised questions about the future
of the Arab Spring. Al Qaeda’s affiliates
in North Africa, Iraq, and the Arabian
Peninsula continued to threaten regional
security.
On September 8, an inflammatory
fourteen-minute video that purported to
be a trailer for a full-length movie called
Innocence of Muslims was aired on an
Egyptian satellite TV network widely
available across the Middle East.
According to several press accounts, the
film depicts a “buffoonish caricature of
the prophet Muhammad,” using “slurs
about him that are often repeated by
Islamophobes,” even comparing him to a
donkey. One press report claims that in
the film the Prophet is “accused of
homosexuality and child molestation.”
Many Egyptian viewers were outraged,
and, fueled by the internet, that rage
quickly spread across the Middle East
and North Africa. Although the U.S.
government had absolutely nothing to do
with the video, many blamed America.
The anniversary of 9/11 added
another potentially combustible element
and, like every year, prompted our
intelligence and security officials to
proceed with extra caution. Yet the
intelligence community, as they’ve
testified since, relayed no actionable
intelligence about specific threats
against any U.S. diplomatic post across
the Middle East and North Africa.
Later that morning I walked from my
office down the hall to the Treaty Room
to officially swear in Gene Cretz, who
had recently returned from service in
Libya, as our new Ambassador to
Ghana. Around the same time, half a
world away in Cairo, young men began
gathering in the street outside the U.S.
Embassy as part of a protest organized
by hard-line Islamist leaders against the
insulting video. The crowd swelled to
more than two thousand people shouting
anti-American slogans and waving black
jihadi banners. Some demonstrators
climbed the walls and ripped apart a
large American flag, replacing it with a
black flag. Egyptian riot police
eventually arrived, but the protest
continued. Thankfully none of our people
were injured in the melee. Journalists
and others in the crowd using social
media recorded angry comments about
the video. One young man said, “This is
a very simple reaction to harming our
prophet.” Another insisted, “This movie
must be banned immediately and an
apology should be made.”
This was not the first time that
provocateurs had used offensive
material to whip up popular outrage
across the Muslim world, often with
deadly results. In 2010, a Florida pastor
named Terry Jones announced plans to
burn the Quran, Islam’s holy text, on the
ninth anniversary of 9/11. His threats
were picked up and amplified by
extremists setting off widespread
protests. At that time I was surprised that
one firebrand in Gainesville, Florida,
with a tiny church could cause so much
trouble. But the consequences of his
threat were all too real. Secretary of
Defense Bob Gates personally called
Jones and told him that his actions
endangered the lives of American and
Coalition soldiers and civilians in Iraq
and Afghanistan. Jones agreed to hold
off, and the anniversary came and went.
Then in March 2011, he went back on
his word and burned a Quran. Bob’s
warnings proved tragically prescient, as
an angry mob in Afghanistan set fire to a
UN office and killed seven people.
Deadly protests erupted again in
February 2012 after U.S. troops
inadvertently burned religious texts at
Bagram Air Force Base in Afghanistan.
Four Americans died. Now Jones was
helping promote this new video insulting
the Prophet Muhammad and there was a
real danger of history repeating itself.
With an eye on the developing
situation in Cairo, I headed to the White
House to meet with Defense Secretary
Leon Panetta and National Security
Advisor Tom Donilon. When I returned
to my office, I huddled with senior State
Department leaders throughout the
afternoon, closely monitoring reports
from our embassy. Our Ambassador to
Egypt, Anne Patterson, happened to be
back in Washington for consultations,
and she stayed in constant contact with
her Deputy Chief of Mission and worked
the phones to pressure the Egyptian
authorities to get control of the situation.
We were all relieved when further
violence was avoided.
We learned later that as events
unfolded in Cairo, in neighboring Libya
Ambassador Chris Stevens was visiting
the country’s second largest city,
Benghazi.
A lot had happened in Libya since my
visit to Tripoli in October 2011. Two
days after I left Libya, Colonel
Muammar Qaddafi was captured and
killed. The first Parliamentary elections
were held in early July 2012, and the
transitional government handed over
power to a new General National
Congress in August in a ceremony that
Chris cited as the highlight of his time in
the country. Chris and his team worked
closely with Libya’s new leaders as they
grappled with the significant challenges
of setting up a democratic government
and providing security and services in a
country hollowed out by decades of
tyranny. Militia fighters, like those who
had greeted me at the airport and
guarded my motorcade a year earlier,
would have to be brought under the
authority of the central government.
There were loose weapons to collect,
elections to organize, and democratic
institutions and processes to establish.
Law and order remained a real problem.
In February 2012, I sent Deputy
Secretary Tom Nides to Tripoli and then
welcomed interim Prime Minister
Abdurrahim El-Keib to Washington in
March. We offered to help the
government secure its borders, disarm
and demobilize the militias, and
reintegrate former fighters into the
security services or civilian life. In July
Deputy Secretary Bill Burns followed
up with another visit. I stayed in touch
with leaders in the Libyan government
by phone, including an August call with
Libyan General National Congress
President Mohammed Magariaf, and
received regular updates from our teams
in Washington and Tripoli on efforts
across the U.S. government to assist the
new Libyan government. There was
preliminary progress on demobilization,
demilitarization, and reintegration, as
well as efforts to secure and disable
loose weapons throughout Libya, but so
much remained to be done. Specialists
from the Defense Department and State
Department border security experts
worked closely with their Libyan
counterparts. On September 4, 2012, we
designated Libya eligible for the Global
Security Contingency Fund, a joint
Defense and State initiative pooling
resources and expertise to address the
wide variety of challenges the Libyan
government faced.
Chris was at the center of all this
activity, and he knew better than anyone
how many challenges remained for
Libya. On Monday, September 10, he
left the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli and
flew four hundred miles east to
Benghazi, where we maintained a
temporary diplomatic post with rotating
staff. Benghazi is a port city on the
Mediterranean Sea with a population of
more than 1 million people, mostly
Sunni Muslims, and large African and
Egyptian minorities. Its varied
architecture, a mix of age-weathered
buildings and construction projects
abandoned half-completed, reflects a
history of conquest and conflict by
competing Arab, Ottoman, and Italian
rulers, as well as the quixotic ambitions
and long, slow decay of the Qaddafi
regime. Benghazi had been a hotbed of
dissidents, and both the 1969 revolution
that brought Qaddafi to power and the
2011 revolution that unseated him began
in the city. Chris knew Benghazi well
from his time as our representative to the
rebel Transitional National Council,
which was based there during the 2011
uprising, and he was widely liked and
admired.
U.S. Ambassadors are not required to
consult or seek approval from
Washington when traveling within their
countries, and rarely do. Like all Chiefs
of Mission, Chris made decisions about
his movements based on the security
assessments of his team on the ground,
as well as his own judgment. After all,
no one had more knowledge or
experience in Libya than he did. He was
well aware of the lawlessness in
Benghazi, including a series of incidents
earlier in the year against Western
interests. Yet he also understood
Benghazi’s strategic importance in Libya
and decided that the value of a visit
outweighed the risks. He brought along
two security officers, so there were five
Diplomatic Security (DS) agents at the
compound in Benghazi at the time of the
attack. With State Department officer
Sean Smith, there was a total of seven
Americans on-site.
We would subsequently learn that
upon arriving in Benghazi, Chris
received a briefing from local CIA
personnel, who were based at a second,
larger compound less than a mile away.
Its existence and mission were closely
guarded secrets, but there was an
understanding between security officials
in both agencies that in an emergency, a
CIA rapid-response team would deploy
to the State Department compound to
provide extra protection. Chris’s first
day ended with dinner with members of
the city council at a hotel in town.
On Tuesday, the eleventh anniversary
of 9/11, Chris held all of his meetings
within the State compound. In the late
afternoon, after the mob had gathered at
our embassy in Cairo, he met with a
Turkish diplomat. When Chris walked
him out afterward, there were no signs
of anything out of the ordinary. At
around 9 P.M. both Chris and Sean
retired for the night.
About forty minutes later, without
warning, dozens of armed men appeared
at the gates of the compound,
overwhelmed the local Libyan guards,
and streamed inside. They set fires as
they went.
Alec, the DS agent manning the
compound’s tactical operations center,
saw the mob on closed-circuit
television, heard the sounds of gunfire
and an explosion, and sprang into action.
He activated the compound’s alert
system, established contact with U.S.
security officials at the embassy in
Tripoli, and, as had been practiced,
alerted the well-armed CIA team
stationed nearby to request their
immediate assistance.
The other four DS agents reacted
exactly as they were trained to do. Scott,
the Agent in Charge, moved Chris and
Sean, two men he would nearly lose his
own life protecting that night, to a
fortified safe haven within the
compound’s main house. The remaining
three agents scrambled to collect their
heavier weapons and tactical gear, but
quickly found themselves pinned down
in two separate buildings elsewhere on
the compound.
Scott kept watch from inside the safe
haven, his M4 rifle at the ready, while
Chris borrowed his phone to make a
series of calls to local contacts and to
his Deputy, Greg Hicks, at the embassy
in Tripoli. They heard men rampaging
through the rest of the house and banging
on the steel gate of the safe haven. Then,
unexpectedly, the attackers withdrew.
They doused the building with diesel
fuel and set it on fire. The diesel gave
off a thick, black, acrid smoke that
quickly filled the air. Soon Chris, Sean,
and Scott were struggling to see and
breathe.
Their only hope was to make it to the
roof. There was an emergency exit that
offered a chance of escape. Crawling on
his hands and knees, Scott led the way.
His eyes and throat burning, he managed
to reach the exit grille and throw it open.
But when he crawled through it and
turned around, Chris and Sean were not
right behind him as they had been only
moments before. They were lost in the
blinding smoke. To this day I am haunted
by the thought of what those excruciating
minutes in the burning building must
have felt like.
Scott searched desperately, reentering
the building multiple times, calling out
their names without success. Finally,
near collapse, he climbed a ladder to the
roof. The other DS agents heard his
hoarse voice crackle through the radio
with a chilling message: the Ambassador
and Sean were missing.
When the crowd of armed attackers,
having ransacked most of the compound,
started to recede, the three agents who
had been pinned down were finally able
to reach the main building. They
provided first aid to Scott, who was
suffering from severe smoke inhalation
and other wounds, and then they retraced
his steps back through the window into
the safe haven. By now it was
impossible to see anything inside
because of the smoke, but they refused to
give up the search, making numerous
attempts to find Chris and Sean,
crawling on the floor and feeling their
way around. When one of them
attempted to open the front door of the
building, part of the ceiling collapsed.
From the moment the CIA station
learned their fellow Americans were
under attack, a response team prepared
to launch a rescue. They could hear
explosions in the distance and quickly
assembled their weapons and prepared
to deploy. Two vehicles of armed
officers left the CIA post for the
diplomatic compound about twenty
minutes after the attack had begun. Until
late October, when the Agency publicly
acknowledged its presence in Benghazi,
the existence of the CIA station was a
secret, so in the immediate aftermath of
the attack these officers received no
public recognition. But all of us at the
State Department were immensely
grateful for the way our CIA colleagues
responded that night.
When the CIA team arrived, they split
up to secure the compound and joined
the DS agents in the search of the
burning building. Soon they made a
terrible discovery. Sean was dead,
apparently from smoke inhalation. His
body was carefully carried out of the
ruined building. There was still no sign
of Chris.
My first word of the attack came
around that time, when Steve Mull
rushed down the hall to my office from
the State Department’s Operations
Center. Steve, a thirty-year veteran of
the Foreign Service, widely respected
for his diplomatic and logistical skills,
was in his final weeks as the
Department’s Executive Secretary,
preparing to take up his next post as
Ambassador to Poland. Among other
responsibilities, the “Exec Sec” is
tasked with managing the flow of
information between Washington and the
Department’s hundreds of posts around
the world. Troubling reports from across
the Middle East had filled this day. But
even against that backdrop, as soon as I
saw the look in Steve’s eyes, I could tell
something was terribly wrong. All he
knew at that point was that our Benghazi
compound was under attack.
My thoughts immediately went to
Chris. I had personally asked him to take
on the assignment of Ambassador to
Libya, and I shuddered to think that he
and our other people on the ground were
now in grave danger.
I picked up the secure phone on my
desk and hit the button that instantly
connected me to the White House, to
National Security Advisor Tom Donilon.
President Obama learned of the attack
during an Oval Office meeting with
Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Marty
Dempsey, a no-nonsense straight
shooter. After hearing the news the
President gave the order to do whatever
was necessary to support our people in
Libya. It was imperative that all
possible resources be mobilized
immediately. The CIA outpost was
already responding, but he wanted any
assets that could be deployed pressed
into service. When Americans are under
fire, that is not an order the Commander
in Chief has to give twice. Our military
does everything humanly possible to
save American lives—and would do
more if they could. That anyone has ever
suggested otherwise is something I will
never understand.
Learning of the attack was a punch in
the gut, but in the middle of an ongoing
crisis, I didn’t have time to process the
flood of emotions—there was too much
to do. I directed our State operations
team, led by Under Secretary Pat
Kennedy, to work with the embassy in
Tripoli to get our people to safety and to
break down the doors of the Libyan
government if necessary to demand more
support. I also called CIA Director
David Petraeus since the Agency
maintained the nearby post with a heavy
security force. We also had to get ready
for the possibility of other assaults
elsewhere. Our embassy in Cairo had
already been targeted. Now Benghazi
was under attack. Where would be next?
Pat was a forty-year veteran of the
Foreign Service, having served eight
Presidents from both parties. Some
mistook his mild manner and penchant
for cardigans and sweater vests as a sign
of softness, but Pat was as tough as they
came. He was calm amid the commotion
and assured me that everything that could
be done was being done. He was no
stranger to fluid events, having served
during some of the worst attacks on State
Department personnel and property, and
as a young Foreign Service officer had a
small role supporting the families of the
six American diplomats who ultimately
escaped Iran after our embassy there
was overrun in 1979 (dramatized in the
film Argo).
In Tripoli a plane was quickly
chartered, and a group of seven military
and intelligence personnel began
prepping for rapid deployment to
Benghazi. Additional options were
limited. The Pentagon had Special
Operations forces standing by in Fort
Bragg, North Carolina, but they would
take several hours to muster and were
more than five thousand miles away. Our
civilian leaders and uniformed
commanders, including the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and others from
his team, have repeatedly testified under
oath both in public and in closed
classified hearings that assets were
immediately mobilized, but none could
quickly reach Libya. Critics have
questioned why the world’s greatest
military force could not get to Benghazi
in time to defend our people. Part of the
answer is that, despite having
established United States Africa
Command in 2008, there just wasn’t
much U.S. military infrastructure in
place in Africa. Unlike in Europe and
Asia, the U.S. military footprint in
Africa is nearly nonexistent.
Additionally our military is not
deployed globally with the mission of
maintaining forces at the ready to defend
diplomatic posts. Tethering our forces to
more than 270 embassies and consulates
worldwide is a mission our military
leaders have testified the Pentagon is
simply not equipped to handle. Those
are the facts, though not everyone
accepts them and some insist on
repeatedly questioning the actions of our
military. For instance, weeks after the
attack there was a sensational report that
an American AC-130 gunship was sent
to Benghazi but later waved off. The
Pentagon undertook a comprehensive
look into the accusation. Not only was
there no gunship nearby, but there was
no gunship on or near the entire continent
of Africa. The closest gunship was over
a thousand miles away in Afghanistan.
This is but one of the false accusations
made by those all too willing to
misinform.
Another asset that some critics assert
would have made a difference was
called FEST. After the embassy
bombings in East Africa in 1998, an
interagency Foreign Emergency Support
Team was deployed; it was trained and
equipped to help restore secure
communications, respond to biohazards,
and provide other support to crippled
diplomatic facilities. But this team was
not an armed reaction force capable of
intervening in an active fight, and they
too were based thousands of miles
away, in Washington.
Many Americans and even members
of Congress were surprised to learn that
there were no U.S. Marines assigned to
our Benghazi compound. In fact Marines
are assigned to only a little over half of
all our diplomatic posts around the
world, where their primary mission is
the protection and, if necessary, the
destruction of classified materials and
equipment. So while there were Marines
stationed at our embassy in Tripoli,
where nearly all of our diplomats
worked and which had the capability to
process classified material, because
there was no classified processing at the
diplomatic compound in Benghazi, there
were no Marines posted there.
There was also no live video feed out
of the compound in Benghazi for anyone
back in Washington to monitor. Some
larger embassies around the world do
have this capability, but Benghazi was a
temporary facility without sufficient
broadband access. It did have closedcircuit cameras and a video recording
system on-site, not unlike a home DVR,
but U.S. security officials would not gain
access to this footage until weeks later,
when Libyan authorities recovered the
equipment and turned it over to
American officials. So officials in the
Diplomatic Security Command Center in
Virginia trying to monitor the rush of
events in real time had to rely on a
single open phone line, listening to their
colleagues in Tripoli and Benghazi.
They could hear some of what was
happening, but the picture was
agonizingly incomplete.
To help fill this gap, one asset that
could be quickly brought to bear was an
unarmed and unmanned surveillance
drone that was already flying a mission
elsewhere over Libya. The drone was
redirected to Benghazi and arrived on
station roughly ninety minutes after the
attack began, providing U.S. security and
intelligence officials another way to
monitor what was happening on the
ground.
Around that time the Operations
Center reported that gunfire at the
compound had subsided and our security
forces were attempting to locate missing
personnel. That was a chilling phrase.
Much of the mob had withdrawn, but for
how long? Fighters and looters were
still milling about nearby. The team
decided that staying any longer would
put more American lives at risk. Despite
the ongoing efforts to find Chris, who
was still missing in the burning main
building, their only choice was to
evacuate back to the CIA’s more heavily
guarded facility less than a mile away.
Reluctantly the five DS agents piled
into an armored vehicle. The drive was
short—only a few minutes—but
harrowing. They took heavy and
sustained fire on the street almost
immediately and sped past a crowd of
fighters clustered around a roadblock.
Two tires blew out and the armored
glass shattered, but they kept pressing
forward. Possibly tailed by two
unknown vehicles, they crossed into the
median and then into oncoming traffic. A
few minutes later they reached the CIA
post. The wounded received medical
support, and the others took up defensive
positions. The CIA response team
followed shortly afterward, carrying
Sean Smith’s body. Chris was still
missing.
On the seventh floor of the State
Department, everyone was doing
everything we could think to do. State
officials at all levels were talking to
their counterparts across the government.
U.S. officials in Washington and Libya
were working with the Libyans to
restore security and help with the search
for our Ambassador. I called the
Department’s senior leadership back
together to take stock and discuss next
steps. I also spoke again with the White
House. The CIA post was now coming
under fire from small arms and rocketpropelled grenades. Everyone there
braced for another swarm of attackers,
but they did not materialize. The
shooting continued sporadically before
finally stopping.
The Operations Center reported that a
hard-line Islamist militia called Ansar
al-Sharia was claiming responsibility
for the attack, though they would later
retract it. It was something to take
seriously. In the days that followed, U.S.
intelligence analysts took a hard look at
the attacks to try to determine how they
began and who participated in them. But
until then, we had to assume and plan for
the worst—the possibility of further
attacks against U.S. interests in the
region.
Our embassy in Tripoli was twisting
every arm they could find, but I wasn’t
satisfied with what we were getting from
the Libyans. I called Libyan President
Magariaf, and as I would do in other
conversations that week, put in the
starkest of terms the possibility of
additional attacks. I wanted to make sure
that he and others understood the urgency
of the situation and did not assume the
threat had passed. Magariaf was deeply
apologetic. I thanked him for his concern
but made it crystal clear that we needed
more than regret: We needed immediate
action to protect our people in Benghazi
and Tripoli.
Meanwhile the plane with U.S.
security reinforcements from Tripoli
landed at the airport in Benghazi. Their
goal was to locate vehicles and get to
the CIA post as quickly as possible. But
by now the airport was full of Libyan
security officials and militia leaders
who insisted on assembling a large
armored motorcade to escort the
Americans. Our frustrated team, anxious
to help their colleagues, was held for
hours until Libyan forces felt confident
enough to leave the airport and head to
the CIA post.
In Washington I convened a
conference call with eight senior
Department leaders and Deputy Chief of
Mission Greg Hicks in Tripoli. Greg
was one of the last people to talk to
Chris before he disappeared, and with
the Ambassador missing, he was now
assuming formal responsibility for the
safety of every American in the country.
It had been a long night, and I was
worried about how our team in Tripoli
was holding up. I also wanted them to
know what was being done from
Washington, by the military, the CIA,
and other parts of the government. Greg
told me that as a precaution, he thought
we should evacuate the embassy in
Tripoli to an alternative compound, and
I agreed. We talked about the search for
Chris, whom we both cared about
deeply. Things were not looking good,
and I could hear the pain in Greg’s
voice. I asked him to pass along my
prayers to his entire team and to stay in
close contact.
I headed to the Operations Center for
a secure videoconference between
various government agencies and the
White House Situation Room, officials
from the National Security Council, the
CIA, the Department of Defense, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other agencies.
This was a Deputies meeting that did not
include Principals, but protocol was the
last thing on my mind. I downloaded to
the group my discussions with Greg and
President Magariaf, and I stressed how
critical it was to get our people out of
Benghazi as quickly and safely as
possible.
Back in my office I told the team it
was time to make a public statement. So
far, I had been single-mindedly focused
on coordinating across our government
and mobilizing resources for our people
on the ground. But reports about events
in Benghazi were swirling in the press,
and the American people deserved to
hear directly from me about what was
going on, even if we had only limited
information. State Department practice
was to hold off on issuing any statement
until we could confirm the fate of all our
personnel—but we still couldn’t locate
Chris. I decided it was important to be
as forthcoming as possible as quickly as
possible. I issued a statement confirming
the loss of one of our officers,
condemning the attack, and pledging to
work with partners around the world to
protect American diplomats, posts, and
citizens.
Not long after talking with me, Greg
and his team at the embassy received a
startling phone call. It was from the
same cell phone that Chris had used in
the final moments before he disappeared
in the smoke-filled safe haven. But this
wasn’t Chris. A man speaking Arabic
said that an unresponsive American
matching the Ambassador’s description
was now at a local hospital. He offered
no further information or assurances.
Could this really be Chris? Or was this
report a trap to lure our people out of the
CIA complex and into the open? We had
to find out. Greg asked a local contact to
go to the hospital and investigate.
Remarkably this person was the same
Libyan who helped rescue our downed
Air Force pilot a year earlier.
An amateur video surfaced days later
that showed a crowd of looters and
onlookers wandering through the
smoldering compound after our team
evacuated. A group of Libyans, never
identified, found Chris’s body amid the
clearing smoke and, although they did
not know his identity, took him to a local
hospital. They reportedly arrived at the
emergency room shortly after 1 A.M.
Doctors spent forty-five minutes
attempting to resuscitate him, but at
around 2 A.M. they declared Chris dead
from smoke inhalation. Later the Prime
Minister of Libya called Greg in Tripoli
with the news. He called it the saddest
phone call of his life. Absolute
confirmation came when Chris’s body
was brought to American personnel at
the airport in Benghazi the next morning.
I knew that Chris was likely dead, but
until confirmation there was still a
chance that he might somehow have
survived. Now that hope was gone.

With our DS agents at the heavily
fortified CIA post and our
reinforcements from Tripoli on the
ground at the airport, I decided to move
from the office to my home in northwest
Washington, only minutes away from
Foggy Bottom. I knew the days ahead
were going to be taxing on us all, with
the entire Department looking to me to
lead them through this shocking tragedy
while keeping everyone focused on what
lay ahead. When I became Secretary the
Department outfitted my house with all
the secure communications and other
equipment necessary to work as easily
from there as I could from the office.
I got on the phone with President
Obama and gave him the latest updates.
He asked me how our people were
holding up and reiterated that he wanted
all necessary steps taken to protect our
diplomats and citizens in Libya and
across the region. I agreed and gave him
my assessment of where we stood. I did
not believe this crisis was over. We
could expect more unrest to come, if not
in Libya, then somewhere else.
The reinforcement team from Tripoli
finally made it from the airport to the
CIA outpost, providing their exhausted
colleagues with a tremendous sense of
relief. It did not last long.
Within minutes of the team’s arrival,
mortar fire was heard. The first shells
missed, but the next hit their target with
devastating force, killing the two CIA
security personnel, Glen Doherty and
Tyrone Woods, and seriously wounding
others, including one of our DS agents,
David.
The tragedy in Benghazi had now
been compounded immeasurably. We
needed to get the rest of our people—
nearly three dozen in all, between
State’s five DS agents and the CIA
personnel—out of that city before we
lost anyone else.
About an hour later Libyan
government security forces, who had
dispersed when the CIA post was hit by
the mortar attack, returned to provide
escort to the airport. A first planeload of
Americans took off at 7:30 A.M. A
second plane evacuated the rest,
including the bodies of Sean Smith, Glen
Doherty, Tyrone Woods, and Chris
Stevens, which had arrived from the
hospital. By noon all U.S. personnel
from Benghazi were finally in Tripoli.
In Washington, I kept thinking about the
horror of what had happened. For the
first time since 1979, a U.S.
Ambassador had been killed in the line
of duty. Four Americans were dead. Our
compound in Benghazi was a smoking
ruin, our CIA post abandoned. And there
was no telling what would happen next,
or where.
I braced myself for the day that lay
ahead. I knew how essential it would be
to lead with strength a reeling
Department while remaining focused on
ongoing threats. But first I needed to call
the families of those we’d lost. They
needed to know how much our
Department and the nation honored their
loved ones’ service, that our hearts were
broken at their loss. These would not be
easy calls to make, but they were a
solemn responsibility.
After checking in for any updates with
General Dempsey, I sat down at my desk
in the State Department and called
Chris’s sister, Anne Stevens, a doctor at
Seattle Children’s Hospital. She had
been up most of the night talking with
Chris’s colleagues at the State
Department and passing news to the rest
of the Stevens family. Even exhausted
and in shock, she was still able to focus
on what her brother would have wanted.
“I hope this will not prevent us from
continuing to support the Libyan people,
from moving ahead,” she told me. Anne
knew how committed Chris was to
helping build a new Libya out of the
wreckage of the Qaddafi regime and
how important that was to American
interests. He had fallen in love with the
Middle East as a young Peace Corps
volunteer teaching English in Morocco
and went on to represent the United
States as a Foreign Service officer all
over the region. Everywhere he went, he
won friends for the United States and
made other people’s hopes his own. I
told Anne that he would be remembered
as a hero by many nations.
In the weeks that followed I was
awed by the grace and dignity with
which the Stevens family coped with
their grief and the harsh spotlight of
history. After I left office we stayed in
touch, and I was proud to support their
efforts to launch the J. Christopher
Stevens Virtual Exchange Initiative,
which will use technology to connect
young people and educators across the
Middle East and the United States. It is a
fitting way to honor Chris’s memory and
to carry forward the work he cared
about so much.
I then called Sean Smith’s wife,
Heather, who lived in the Netherlands
with the couple’s two young children,
and expressed my condolences for the
loss of her husband. It was an enormous
shock. He and Heather had made plans
to go on vacation after his tour. Like
Chris Stevens, Sean Smith was
committed to America’s engagement
around the world and proud to serve. In
the aftermath of the attack in Benghazi,
Heather also expressed her belief that
her husband wouldn’t have wanted
America to pull back from the world or
live in fear.
That was an important sentiment to
remember on September 12. Overnight,
protests against the offensive internet
video had continued to spread from
Egypt across the Middle East. About
two hundred angry Moroccans gathered
outside our consulate in Casablanca. In
Tunisia police had to use tear gas to
disperse a crowd outside the U.S.
Embassy. In Sudan, Mauritania, and
Egypt similar demonstrations were
taking place outside American outposts.
After what had happened in Benghazi the
day before, everyone was on edge, and
we treated each incident as if it might
quickly spiral out of control.
I convened another videoconference
with the exhausted but determined team
still in Tripoli. They had done
extraordinary work over the previous
twenty-four hours, and I wanted to thank
them personally and let them know that
though they were thousands of miles
from home, they were not alone.
Next I wanted to speak directly to the
American people and the world. I felt
the heavy burden of explaining the
unexplainable to a country that had
woken up to news of another bloody
9/11. Emotions were running very high.
A number of my aides, who had known
and loved Chris Stevens, were in tears. I
took a quiet moment alone in my office
to compose myself and think about what
I wanted to say. Then I walked down the
hall to the Treaty Room, where the press
corps was assembled.
As the cameras snapped away, I laid
out the facts as we knew them—“heavily
armed militants” had assaulted our
compound and killed our people—and
assured Americans that we were doing
everything possible to keep safe our
personnel and citizens around the world.
I also offered prayers for the families of
the victims and praise for the diplomats
who serve our country and our values all
over the world. Chris Stevens had risked
his life to stop a tyrant, then given his
life trying to help build a better Libya.
“The world needs more Chris
Stevenses,” I said.
With Anne Stevens’s plea to carry
forward Chris’s commitment to the
future of Libya still in my ears, I
explained to the American people that
“this was an attack by a small and
savage group—not the people or
Government of Libya,” and that we
would not turn our back on a country we
had helped liberate. I also assured them
that while we were still working to
determine the exact motivations and
methods of those who had carried out the
attacks, we would not rest until they
were found and brought to justice.
After my remarks I headed to the
White House, where President Obama
was preparing to address the nation
himself. Standing just outside the Oval
Office, we discussed whether he could
come to Foggy Bottom right after his
statement to comfort Chris’s and Sean’s
grieving colleagues. I told him it would
mean a great deal to a Department still
very much in shock. We walked out into
the Rose Garden, where the President
told the world, “No acts of terror will
ever shake the resolve of this great
nation, alter that character, or eclipse the
light of the values that we stand for.”
After the President spoke I raced back
to the Department. Though he suggested I
ride over with him, I wanted to make
sure everything was in place for this
impromptu visit. Usually a Presidential
visit takes weeks to orchestrate. This
one would be on the fly.
When he arrived, we walked together
through the lobby and I showed him
where the names of diplomats who have
fallen in the line of duty are inscribed in
marble. He later signed the condolence
book for those we had just lost.
On almost no notice, hundreds of State
Department employees had gathered in
the building’s inner courtyard, including
many from the Bureau of Near Eastern
Affairs, where Chris Stevens had spent
his career, as well as the Information
Resource Management Bureau, where
Sean Smith worked. The hastily
arranged sound system wouldn’t work,
so I set the microphone on the ground
and went ahead introducing the
President. He spoke movingly for twenty
minutes about how much the work of our
diplomats means to America’s national
security and to our values. He urged the
men and women of the State Department
to honor the memory of those we lost by
redoubling our efforts to represent the
best traditions of our great nation. I
could see on their faces how it meant the
world to them, and to the many others
watching through their windows
overlooking the courtyard. When he was
finished, I brought him over to meet
some of Chris’s colleagues in Near
Eastern Affairs, who had been working
practically nonstop since the crisis
began. Later that afternoon I went to
their offices and the office where Sean’s
colleagues worked to express my
sorrow and gratitude. I felt enormously
proud to serve this President, to lead this
team, and to be part of the State
Department family.

The turmoil in the region continued to
rage. Over the coming days and weeks
we faced wave after wave of unrest that
threatened our people and posts in a
dozen countries and resulted in the
deaths of scores of protesters, though
thankfully no additional American lives
were lost.
On Thursday, September 13,
demonstrators breached the gates of the
U.S. Embassy in Yemen. Yet more
violent clashes continued in Cairo. In
India as many as 150 people were
arrested outside our consulate in
Chennai. On Friday the tensions grew
even worse. Thousands of Tunisians
besieged our embassy in Tunis,
destroying vehicles and defacing
buildings while staff was barricaded
inside. An American school across the
street was burned and looted. I called
Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki,
who promised to send his personal
guards to disperse the protesters and
protect our American and Tunisian staff.
In Khartoum thousands of Sudanese
swarmed over the walls of our embassy
and tried to raise a black flag. Pakistani
protesters took to the streets in
Islamabad, Karachi, and Peshawar.
There were demonstrations as far away
as Indonesia and the Philippines. Even
in Kuwait, a wealthy country that the
United States helped liberate in the first
Gulf War, people were arrested trying to
scale the walls of our embassy. The
spark lit in Cairo on September 8 was
now a full-on wildfire, continuing to
spread and threaten American posts and
personnel in its path.
Throughout those difficult days my
team and I were in constant touch with
the governments of the countries
wracked by protests. I had tense
conversations with regional leaders who
needed to hear exactly how serious this
was. I also worked with the Pentagon to
make sure extra Marines were
dispatched to Tunisia, as well as to
Sudan and Yemen.
I know there are some who don’t want
to hear that an internet video played a
role in this upheaval. But it did.
Pakistani protesters even beat an effigy
of Terry Jones, the Florida pastor
associated with the film. And American
diplomats, far from the politics of
Washington, felt the impact up close.
What about the attack in Benghazi? In
the heat of the crisis we had no way of
knowing for sure what combination of
factors motivated the assault or whether
and how long it had been planned. I was
clear about this in my remarks the next
morning, and in the days that followed
administration officials continued to tell
the American people that we had
incomplete information and were still
looking for answers. There were many
theories—but still little evidence. I
myself went back and forth on what
likely happened, who did it, and what
mix of factors—like the video—played
a part. But it was unquestionably inciting
the region and triggering protests all
over, so it would have been strange not
to consider, as days of protests unfolded,
that it might have had the same effect
here, too. That’s just common sense.
Later investigation and reporting
confirmed that the video was indeed a
factor. All we knew at that time with
complete certainty was that Americans
had been killed and others were still in
danger. Why we were under attack or
what the attackers were thinking or
doing earlier that day was not at the
forefront of anyone’s mind. All that
mattered to us was saving lives. Nothing
else made a difference.
However, there were journalists still
on the ground in Benghazi asking
questions. The New York Times
reported, “Interviewed at the scene on
Tuesday night, many attackers and those
who backed them said they were
determined to defend their faith from the
video’s insults.” Reuters also had a
reporter on the ground that night, who
wrote, “The attackers were part of a
mob blaming America for a film they
said insulted the Prophet Muhammad.”
The Washington Times also interviewed
residents in Benghazi and said, “Heavily
armed militants had hijacked what was
initially a peaceful protest outside the
U.S. diplomatic mission. The
demonstrators were protesting a film that
insulted Islam’s prophet, Muhammad.
They were quickly joined by a separate
group of men armed with rocketpropelled grenades.”
More than a year later, in December
2013, the New York Times published the
most comprehensive account to date of
what happened in Benghazi based on
“months of investigation” and “extensive
interviews with Libyans in Benghazi
who had direct knowledge of the attack
there and its context.” The investigation
concluded that, “Contrary to claims by
some members of Congress, it was
fueled in large part by anger at an
American-made video denigrating
Islam.” The Times found that, “Anger at
the video motivated the initial attack,”
and “there is no doubt that anger over the
video motivated many attackers.”
There were scores of attackers that
night, almost certainly with differing
motives. It is inaccurate to state that
every single one of them was influenced
by this hateful video. It is equally
inaccurate to state that none of them
were. Both assertions defy not only the
evidence but logic as well. As the New
York Times investigation found, the
reality “was different, and murkier, than
either of those story lines suggests.”
Regardless, there was no question that
the unrest threatening other U.S.
embassies and consulates around the
world was related to the video. So over
the course of those difficult days, I did
what I could to publicly address the
widespread anger in the Muslim world.
As a person of faith myself, I understand
how hurtful it can be when your beliefs
are insulted. But no matter how wronged
one might feel, resorting to violence is
never justified. The world’s great
religions are strong enough to withstand
petty insults, and our individual faith
should be as well.
On the evening of September 13, I
hosted the State Department’s annual Eid
al Fitr reception marking the end of
Ramadan, Islam’s holy month of fasting.
Among a warm and diverse crowd, I
emphasized that we knew the killers in
Benghazi did not speak for the more than
1 billion Muslims around the world.
Then the Libyan Ambassador to the
United States came forward to say a few
words. He grew emotional remembering
his friend Chris Stevens, whom he had
known for years. They had played tennis
and eaten traditional Libyan food
together and spent hours talking about
the future. Chris was a hero, he said,
who never stopped believing in the
potential of the Libyan people to emerge
from the shadow of dictatorship.
He wasn’t the only one who felt that
way. Tens of thousands of Libyans
poured into the streets of Benghazi to
mourn Chris, who they knew as a
steadfast champion of their revolution.
The images were striking. One young
woman, her head covered and her eyes
haunted with sadness, held up a
handwritten sign that said, “Thugs and
killers don’t represent Benghazi nor
Islam.” Others said, “Chris Stevens was
a friend to all Libyans,” and “We want
justice for Chris.”
In Tripoli the country’s leaders
publicly condemned the attack and
organized a memorial service for Chris.
“He gained the trust of the Libyan
people,” President Magariaf told the
mourners. The government fired top
security officials responsible for
Benghazi and, on September 22, issued
an ultimatum to Ansar al-Sharia and
other militias across the country: Disarm
and disband in forty-eight hours or face
the consequences. As many as ten major
armed groups complied. Taking matters
into their own hands, the people of
Benghazi overran the headquarters of
Ansar al-Sharia and many of the
militia’s members fled the town. “You
terrorists, you cowards, go back to
Afghanistan,” people chanted.
Throughout this sad period, the families
of our fallen colleagues were always on
my mind. I wanted to be sure that we did
everything possible to comfort and
accommodate them. I asked Chief of
Protocol Capricia Marshall to make this
her mission. Complicating matters was
the fact that Tyrone Woods’s and Glen
Doherty’s real jobs working for the CIA
were still secret, and would remain so
for six more weeks. Nobody was
permitted to even talk about it with their
families, who may or may not have
known the truth of their loved ones’
missions at the time.
I asked Deputy Secretary of State Bill
Burns, America’s highest-ranking
Foreign Service officer, who was
traveling abroad, to meet the plane
carrying the remains of our fallen and
accompany them from Germany back to
Washington. Bill is as balanced and
stoic as they come, but that is a journey
no one should ever have to take.
Normally the remains of Americans
who are killed serving our country go
through Dover Air Force Base in
Delaware, where casualties from Iraq
and Afghanistan return. But I wanted to
be sure that the families and our
colleagues from the State Department
had a chance to be present for their
arrival, if they wanted to be. So with
help from Leon Panetta and his Pentagon
team, we routed the plane from Germany
to Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland
before proceeding to Dover, just as was
done in 1998 after the East Africa
embassy bombings.
On Friday afternoon, three days after
the attacks, President Obama, Vice
President Biden, Secretary of Defense
Leon Panetta, and I met the families at
Andrews. Sean Smith and Tyrone
Woods both had small children. Seeing
them there, knowing they would grow up
without their fathers, was almost more
than I could bear. All four men had
loved ones who were devastated by
their sudden loss. In a situation like that,
there are no sentiments that can provide
much comfort or understanding. All you
can do is offer a human touch, a kind
word, a gentle embrace. The room was
crowded with more than sixty family
members and close friends, and every
person carried his or her own private
grief. They were united by the heroism
and service of those they loved, and the
grief they felt for lost husbands, sons,
fathers, and brothers.
We walked out to a large open hangar
off the tarmac, where thousands of
friends and colleagues had gathered
under a giant American flag. It was an
extraordinary outpouring of support and
respect. Everyone stood in somber
silence as U.S. Marines in crisp blues
and whites slowly carried the four flagdraped coffins from the transport plane
to waiting hearses and then saluted the
fallen. A military chaplain offered a
prayer.
When it was my turn to speak, I paid
tribute to the service and sacrifice of the
four patriots we had lost and tried to
reflect both the pride and sorrow their
colleagues and I felt. I also wanted to
honor the work of diplomacy that Chris
Stevens had so exemplified, and I talked
about the remarkable scenes of sympathy
and solidarity we had seen in Libya
since his death. They were testaments to
the impact Chris had there. I also read
aloud a letter from Mahmoud Abbas, the
President of the Palestinian Authority,
who worked closely with Chris when he
served in Jerusalem and fondly recalled
his energy and integrity. Abbas deplored
his murder as “an act of ugly terror.”
Finally, with protests continuing across
the region, I once again addressed the
ongoing unrest and anti-Americanism
rocking the Middle East that had begun
with a video before taking on a life of its
own. “The people of Egypt, Libya,
Yemen and Tunisia did not trade the
tyranny of a dictator for the tyranny of a
mob,” I said. The violence needed to
stop. We could expect more difficult
days to come, but the United States
would not retreat from the world or our
responsibilities of global leadership.
We would “wipe away our tears, stiffen
our spines, and face the future
undaunted.”
President Obama added his own
sober words of eulogy. When he
finished, I squeezed his hand. He put his
arm around my shoulder. The Marine
Band played “America the Beautiful.”
Never had the responsibilities of office
felt so heavy.

As Secretary of State, I was accountable
for the safety of almost seventy thousand
people at the Department and USAID
and our more than 270 posts around the
world. When something went wrong, as
it did in Benghazi, it was my
responsibility. And that responsibility
included making sure that we determined
where the gaps had been in the
Department’s systems and security
procedures and that we did everything
possible to reduce the risks of another
tragedy in the future. We had learned
from Beirut in 1983, from Kenya and
Tanzania in 1998, from September 11,
2001, and now it was time to learn from
the tragedy in Benghazi. That learning
process needed to start with figuring out
what went wrong.
Whenever there is a loss of life of
State Department personnel overseas,
law requires that an Accountability
Review Board be stood up to
investigate. Since 1988 there have been
nineteen such investigations. Thomas
Pickering was chosen to serve as Chair
of the Benghazi review board. Pickering
is a retired senior Foreign Service
officer with an impeccable record who
has represented the United States all
over the world, including in many
difficult posts such as El Salvador
during that country’s civil war, Israel
during the start of the first intifada, and
Russia in the early years after the fall of
the Soviet Union. Tom is tough, smart,
and blunt. To honor and protect the
Department he loved, he would spare no
criticism wherever he found error. If
anyone could lead a credible
investigation and find the answers to our
many questions, it was Ambassador
Pickering.
Retired Admiral Mike Mullen, a
former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and a widely respected, straighttalking Navy man, served as Pickering’s
partner. They were joined by a
distinguished group of public servants
with long experience in diplomacy,
management, and intelligence. The fiveperson board was tasked with getting to
the bottom of what happened.
I announced the investigation on
September 20, just a few weeks after the
attacks. That was faster than many
previous investigations had launched,
but it was important to move as quickly
as possible. I ordered everyone at the
State Department to cooperate fully and
urged the board to leave no stone
unturned. They had unfettered access to
anyone and anything they thought
relevant to their investigation, including
me if they had chosen to do so. Though
most previous review board reports
were not made available to the public, I
wanted to release as many as possible
without compromising any security
sensitivities.
As the investigation got under way, I
also took steps to address a number of
pressing vulnerabilities that couldn’t
wait for the official report. I ordered an
immediate and thorough review of our
diplomatic security posture around the
world. I asked the Department of
Defense to partner with us in forming
joint security assessment teams to
carefully scrutinize embassies and
consulates in dangerous countries,
sending teams of Special Forces and
Diplomatic Security specialists to more
than a dozen high-risk nations. I worked
with General Dempsey and Secretary
Panetta to dispatch additional Marine
Security Guards to bolster security at
high-threat posts, and asked Congress to
fund additional Marines going forward,
hire additional Diplomatic Security
agents, and address physical
vulnerabilities at our facilities overseas.
I named the first Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for High-Threat Posts
in the Bureau of Diplomatic Security.
When the Accountability Review
Board finished its report, Ambassador
Pickering and Admiral Mullen briefed
me on its findings. They didn’t pull a
single punch. Their investigation was
hard-hitting, finding systemic problems
and management deficiencies in both the
Bureau of Diplomatic Security and the
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs. They
found poor coordination between the
offices handling diplomatic security and
the offices guiding policy and relations
with the host government. Security was
not viewed as a “shared responsibility,”
and there was confusion about who on
the ground, beyond the Ambassador
himself, was actually empowered to
make decisions. With more than 270
posts around the world, each with its
own technical challenges and
requirements, day-to-day questions
about security rarely rose to the top
levels of the Department, and, as a
result, there was inadequate leadership
in regard to matters of security.
Though security upgrades had been
made to the Benghazi compound—
including extending the height of the
outer wall with masonry concrete and
barbed wire; installing external lighting,
concrete vehicle barriers, guard booths,
and sandbag emplacements; hardening
wooden doors with steel and reinforced
locks; and adding equipment to detect
explosives—the review board
determined that these precautions were
simply inadequate in an increasingly
dangerous city. A focus of the
investigation and Congressional
inquiries was on the question of whether
requests made by security officials on
the ground in Libya were denied by their
supervisors in Washington. The review
board found that personnel in Benghazi
did not feel that their security requests
were “a high priority for Washington”
and that “Embassy Tripoli did not
demonstrate strong and sustained
advocacy with Washington for increased
security.” At the embassy, and in the
relevant bureaus and offices charged
with making decisions about security,
there was “confusion over who,
ultimately, was responsible and
empowered to make decisions.”
Communications between Washington
and Tripoli took the form of phone calls,
emails, and cables. Millions of these
documents are sent every year by posts
to headquarters, by headquarters to
posts, between posts, and so on. They
are used for everything from
summarizing what’s happening in a
country to announcing personnel
changes. Every cable written to
headquarters is sent over the
Ambassador’s name and addressed to
the Secretary of State. Every cable
written by headquarters goes out over
the name of the Secretary of State to the
Ambassador. That might not make a
whole lot of sense, but it’s been the
practice of the State Department for as
long as anyone can remember.
Obviously no Secretary can read or
write these more than 2 million cables a
year, and Ambassadors aren’t writing—
or even aware of—every cable that
comes in or out of their embassy. Only a
fraction are actually meant for the
Secretary’s eyes. The bulk of them are
meant for the other recipients, sometimes
numbering in the hundreds.
Some critics have taken advantage of
this procedural quirk to say that security
requests reached my desk. But that’s not
how it works. It shouldn’t. And it didn’t.
Security matters are handled by officials
responsible for security. It’s rare that
such a cable would come to the
Secretary of State’s desk. First, that’s
not what the sender intended. An agent in
Islamabad isn’t writing to me
personally, asking for more ammunition.
Second, it wouldn’t make sense. The
professionals charged with security
should be the ones making security
decisions. Third, it’s just plain
impossible for any Secretary of any
Cabinet agency to take that on, not only
because of the volume but because it’s
just not their expertise, nor is it mine. I
had confidence in Diplomatic Security
because they were ably protecting our
posts in dangerous places all over the
world, including highly volatile
countries such as Afghanistan and
Yemen.
Another major finding of the review
board was that the Department relied too
heavily on local Libyan security. Under
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961, host governments
have primary responsibility for
providing security to diplomatic
facilities in their countries. But in
fractured postrevolutionary Libya, the
government had limited capacity, with
militias filling many of its functions. So
the Department had contracted with
members of a local militia vetted by the
CIA to be present at the compound at all
times, and also contracted unarmed local
security guards to man the entry points.
As became evident during the attacks,
there were fatal weaknesses in their
abilities and willingness to fulfill their
security duties against fellow Libyans
when they were most needed.
The review board also noted that the
State Department faced a “struggle to
obtain the resources necessary to carry
out its work,” something we faced in a
time of shrinking budgets across the
entire government. I spent four years
making the case to Congress that
adequately funding our diplomats and
development experts was a national
security priority, and we had many great
partners and champions on the Hill. But
it was a continuing challenge. The
review board called for “a more serious
and sustained commitment from
Congress to support State Department
needs, which, in total, constitute a small
percentage both of the full national
budget and that spent for national
security.”
In its final analysis, the review board
found that “U.S. personnel on the ground
in Benghazi performed with courage and
readiness to risk their lives to protect
their colleagues, in a near impossible
situation.” Despite the flaws in our
security systems, the investigation
concluded that “every possible effort
was made to rescue and recover
Ambassador Stevens and Sean Smith”
and that “there simply was not enough
time for armed U.S. military assets to
have made a difference.” The report
praised the administration’s “timely”
and “exceptional” coordination during
the crisis itself and found no delays in
decision making and no denials of
support from Washington or from the
military. It said our response saved
American lives, and it did.
The review board made twenty-nine
specific recommendations (twenty-four
unclassified) to address the deficiencies
it found in areas such as training, fire
safety, staffing, and threat analysis. I
agreed with all twenty-nine and
immediately accepted them. I asked
Deputy Secretary Tom Nides to head a
task force to ensure that all of the
recommendations would be implemented
quickly and completely and to take a
number of additional steps above and
beyond the recommendations. We would
take a top-to-bottom look at how the
State Department makes decisions about
where, when, and whether people
operate in high-threat areas and how we
respond to threats and crises.
Tom and his team got right to work
translating each of the recommendations
into sixty-four specific action items.
They were assigned to bureaus and
offices with specific timelines for
completion. In addition we initiated an
annual high-threat post review to be
chaired by the Secretary of State and
ongoing reviews by the Deputy
Secretaries to ensure that pivotal
questions about security would reach the
highest levels. We also began
regularizing protocols for sharing
information with Congress so that their
resource decisions were continually
informed by our security needs on the
ground.
I pledged that I would not leave office
until every recommendation was on its
way to implementation. By the time I
left, we had met that goal. By then the
State Department was working with
Congress and the Department of Defense
to increase the number of Marine
Security Detachments at U.S. diplomatic
facilities, had reviewed and begun
upgrading fire and life safety equipment
requirements abroad, started equipping
all overseas facilities with more modern
surveillance cameras, created 151 new
Diplomatic Security positions with
Congressional support, and enhanced the
Department’s security training efforts.

As a former Senator I understand and
have a great deal of respect for the
oversight role that Congress is meant to
play. Over my eight years serving on
Capitol Hill, I exercised that
responsibility many times when I
believed there were tough questions that
needed answers. So being responsive
and transparent with lawmakers was a
priority starting immediately after the
attacks. I decided to go up to Capitol
Hill the week after the attacks to brief
the entire House and Senate on what we
knew at that point, along with the
Director of National Intelligence James
Clapper, Deputy Secretary of Defense
Ashton Carter, Vice Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral James
“Sandy” Winnefeld Jr., and other senior
officials from the intelligence and law
enforcement communities. Many
members of Congress were left
unsatisfied with the answers they heard
that day; some were outright angry. We
ourselves were frustrated by not having
every answer, but that didn’t deter us
from sharing what we knew. Though the
briefing was scheduled for only an hour,
I remained in the Senate’s secure
chamber for more than two and a half
hours, until every single Senator who
had a question was able to ask it.
Over the months that followed, senior
officials, most of them nonpartisan
career professionals, from the State
Department, the Department of Defense,
the CIA, the FBI, and other intelligence
agencies appeared on more than thirty
occasions before eight different
Congressional committees, submitted
thousands of pages of documents, and
answered questions as quickly and fully
as possible.
In January I spent more than five hours
testifying before the Senate and the
House of Representatives, answering
what must have been more than a
hundred questions from dozens of
members as best I could, given what we
knew at the time. Though the end of my
term was near, I told the Senators and
Congressmen that I was determined to
leave the State Department and our
country safer and stronger. Addressing
the attacks in Benghazi, I stated, “As I
have said many times, I take
responsibility, and nobody is more
committed to getting this right.” The
United States has a vital role to play as a
global leader, I reminded the
lawmakers, and when America is absent,
especially from unstable environments,
there are consequences. That’s why I
sent Chris Stevens to Libya in the first
place; it’s also why he wanted to be
there. It was our responsibility, I said, to
make sure that the men and women on
the front lines always have the resources
they need and to do everything we can to
reduce the risks they face. America
could not and would not retreat.
Some of the members of Congress
asked thoughtful questions aimed at
applying the hard lessons we had
learned and improving future operations.
Others remained fixated on chasing after
conspiracy theories that had nothing to
do with how we could prevent future
tragedies. And some only showed up
because of the cameras. They had
skipped closed hearings when there
wasn’t a chance of being on TV.
Much attention focused on what Susan
Rice, our Ambassador to the United
Nations, said on various Sundaymorning talk shows on September 16,
five days after the attacks in Benghazi. In
response to questions, Susan cautioned
that the facts about what happened in
Benghazi were still unclear and that an
investigation was pending. But, she said,
according to the best information
currently available, the attacks were
“initially a spontaneous reaction to what
had just transpired hours before in
Cairo, almost a copycat of—of the
demonstrations against our facility in
Cairo, which were prompted, of course,
by the video. What we think then
transpired in Benghazi is that
opportunistic extremist elements came to
the consulate as this was unfolding.”
Critics accused her of trumping up
tales of a protest that never happened in
order to cover up the fact that this had
been a successful terrorist attack on
President Obama’s watch. They
obsessed over the question of who in the
government prepared Susan’s “talking
points” that morning and hoped to find
evidence of heavy-handed political
malfeasance by the White House. Susan
stated what the intelligence community
believed, rightly or wrongly, at the time.
That was the best she or anyone could
do. Every step of the way, whenever
something new was learned, it was
quickly shared with Congress and the
American people. There is a difference
between getting something wrong, and
committing wrong. A big difference that
some have blurred to the point of casting
those who made a mistake as
intentionally deceitful.
Many also fixate on the question of
why I didn’t go on TV that morning, as if
appearing on a talk show is the
equivalent of jury duty, where one has to
have a compelling reason to get out of it.
I don’t see appearing on Sunday-morning
television as any more of a
responsibility than appearing on latenight TV. Only in Washington is the
definition of talking to Americans
confined to 9 A.M. on Sunday mornings.
The days and hours in between simply
don’t count. I don’t buy that.
The American people need to be kept
informed of what’s happening. That’s
our responsibility. I wanted the
American people to hear directly from
me. That’s why I spoke publicly first
thing in the morning after the attack. And
two days later at Andrews Air Force
Base. And countless times in the weeks
and months that followed, through
statements, press interviews, and press
conferences.
The extensive public record now
makes clear that Susan was using
information that originated with and was
approved by the CIA. The earliest drafts
of the talking points written and
circulated by the Agency said, “We
believe based on currently available
information that the attacks in Benghazi
were spontaneously inspired by the
protests at the U.S. Embassy in Cairo.”
That assessment didn’t come from
political operatives in the White House;
it came from career professionals in the
intelligence community. It was written
by intelligence officials for use by
members of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence, Democrats
and Republicans alike, who asked David
Petraeus at the end of a briefing on
Benghazi on Friday the 14th what part of
what they heard behind closed doors
they were allowed to say on television.
The points were not designed to be an
exhaustive account of every piece of
intelligence; they were merely meant to
help already briefed Congressmen make
public statements while staying clear of
classified or sensitive material. None of
the intelligence officials working on that
request had any idea the talking points
would be used two days later by Susan.
This is another conspiracy theory that
flies in the face of facts—and reason.
I was asked about this repeatedly
during my Congressional testimony. “I
personally was not focused on talking
points. I was focused on keeping our
people safe,” I responded. At one point,
during some particularly tendentious
questioning, the exchange grew heated.
Afterward some of my words were taken
out of context for political purposes, so
it’s worth repeating my full answer that
day:
With all due respect, the fact is we
had four dead Americans. Was it
because of a protest? Or was it
because of guys out for a walk one
night who decided they would go
kill some Americans? What
difference at this point does it
make? It is our job to figure out
what happened and do everything
we can to prevent it from ever
happening again, Senator. Now,
honestly I will do my best to
answer your questions about this,
but the, the fact is that people
were trying in real time to get to
the best information. The
[intelligence community] has a
process, I understand, going with
the other committees to explain
how these talking points came out.
But, you know to be clear, it is
from my perspective, less
important today looking
backwards as to why these
militants decided they did it, than
to find them and bring them to
justice, and then maybe we’ll
figure out what was going on in
the meantime.
In yet another example of the terrible
politicization of this tragedy, many have
conveniently chosen to interpret the
phrase “What difference at this point
does it make?” to mean that I was
somehow minimizing the tragedy of
Benghazi. Of course that’s not what I
said. Nothing could be further from the
truth. And many of those trying to make
hay of it know that, but don’t care. My
point was simple: If someone breaks
into your home and takes your family
hostage, how much time are you going to
spend focused on how the intruder spent
his day as opposed to how best to rescue
your loved ones and then prevent it from
happening again? Many of these same
people are a broken record about
unanswered questions. But there is a
difference between unanswered
questions and unlistened to answers.
Coming in the heat of a tight
Presidential campaign less than two
months before Election Day, maybe it’s
naïve of me to think the death of four
Americans wouldn’t have been used for
political purposes. Politics only
muddied the context and obscured many
of the facts. One of the best parts of
being Secretary of State was
experiencing four years in a place where
partisan politics was almost entirely
absent from our work.
Those who exploit this tragedy over
and over as a political tool minimize the
sacrifice of those who served our
country. I will not be a part of a political
slugfest on the backs of dead Americans.
It’s just plain wrong, and it’s unworthy
of our great country. Those who insist on
politicizing the tragedy will have to do
so without me.

As Secretary I got to know many of the
Diplomatic Security officers stationed
all over the world, and I was
extraordinarily grateful for their service
and professionalism. The two agents
who headed up my own protective
detail, first Fred Ketchem and then Kurt
Olsson, were unflappable and
indefatigable. I trusted them with my
life.
Although the five agents in Benghazi
on September 11 were vastly
outnumbered, they performed heroically
and put their own lives on the line to
protect their colleagues. David, the agent
critically wounded in the mortar attack
at the CIA base, spent months recovering
at Walter Reed Medical Center. I called
him during his stay and told him that
when he was healthy enough, I wanted to
host him and his colleagues and properly
honor them for their service.
On the morning of January 31, 2013,
my second-to-last day as Secretary of
State, the Treaty Room was filled with
family and friends of the five agents.
David was still in a wheelchair, but he
made it. Members of the Stevens family
were there as well, to show their
appreciation for how much these men
had done to protect Chris. It was my
honor to pay tribute to their courage and
professionalism. They represented the
strength and spirit of a great nation. I
presented each agent with the State
Department’s Heroism Award. There
were tears in people’s eyes as they
watched. It was a reminder that on that
terrible night, we saw the best and worst
of humanity, just as we had eleven years
before.
Memories of Benghazi will stay with
me always, and they will shape the way
America’s diplomats do their jobs in the
future. But we should remember Chris
Stevens, Sean Smith, Glen Doherty, and
Tyrone Woods as much for how they
lived as for how they died. They all
volunteered to serve their country where
security was far from assured because
those were the places where American
interests and values were most at stake
and they were most needed.
18

Iran: Sanctions and
Secrets

The Sultan of Oman has a flair for the
dramatic.
We were sitting over a lavish lunch in
a palace designed by the Sultan himself
in Oman’s capital city of Muscat, near
the tip of the Arabian Peninsula, when I
heard the familiar strains of John Philip
Sousa’s “Liberty Bell” march. Sultan
Qaboos, dressed in a long flowing robe
with a ceremonial dagger on his belt and
a colorful turban on his head, smiled and
looked up. On a balcony above us,
partially hidden by a screen, was part of
the Royal Oman Symphony Orchestra. It
was a typical gesture for a shrewd and
gracious leader who valued his
relationship with the United States,
loved music, and used his absolute
power to modernize his country over
four decades of rule.
What the Sultan had to say was even
more dramatic. It was January 12, 2011,
just days before the Arab Spring would
upend the chessboard of Middle East
geopolitics. I had just come from
Yemen, Oman’s troubled southern
neighbor, and was headed to a regional
conference in Qatar to warn leaders that
without economic and political reform,
their regimes would “sink into the sand.”
But today the Sultan’s focus was on Iran.
The standoff over Iran’s illicit nuclear
program was escalating, and it posed an
urgent threat to regional and global
security. Since 2009 the Obama
Administration had pursued a “dualtrack” strategy of pressure and
engagement, but negotiations between
Iran and the five permanent members of
the UN Security Council (the United
States, Russia, China, Britain, and
France), plus Germany—the so-called
P5+1—were going nowhere. The
prospects of armed conflict, possibly
including an Israeli strike to knock out
Iranian nuclear facilities like the ones
carried out against Iraq in 1981 and
Syria in 2007, were mounting.
“I can help,” the Sultan said. He was
one of the few leaders seen by all sides
as an honest broker, with close ties in
Washington, the Gulf states, and Tehran.
He proposed hosting secret direct talks
between the United States and Iran to
resolve the nuclear issue. Previous
attempts to engage Iran’s theocratic
regime had failed, but the Sultan thought
there might be a chance for him to
facilitate a breakthrough. Secrecy would
be necessary to prevent hard-liners on
all sides from derailing talks before they
had a chance to get going. Was I willing
to explore the idea?
On the one hand, there was no reason
to trust the Iranians and every reason to
believe they would exploit any
opportunity for delay and distraction.
New negotiations could turn into a rabbit
hole that would buy the Iranians time to
race closer to their goal of a nuclear
weapon that would threaten Israel, their
neighbors, and the world. Any
concessions we offered as part of these
talks could undo years of careful work to
build an international consensus for
tough sanctions and increased pressure
on the regime in Tehran. On the other
hand, the Sultan’s offer could be our best
chance to avoid conflict or the
unacceptable prospect of a nucleararmed Iran. Our failure to pursue
diplomacy could end up fraying the
broad international coalition we had
built to impose and enforce sanctions on
Iran.

While it is hard to believe, given all that
has happened since, Iran was once a
Cold War ally of the United States. The
country’s monarch, the Shah, owed his
throne to a 1953 coup supported by the
Eisenhower Administration against a
democratically elected government
thought to be sympathetic to
Communism. It was a classic Cold War
move for which many Iranians never
forgave America. Our governments
enjoyed close relations for more than
twenty-five years—until, in 1979, the
autocratic Shah was overthrown by a
popular revolution. Shiite
fundamentalists led by Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini soon seized power
and imposed their theocratic version of
an Islamic republic on the Iranian
people. Iran’s new rulers were
implacably opposed to America, calling
us “the Great Satan.” In November 1979,
Iranian radicals stormed the U.S.
Embassy in Tehran and held fifty-two
Americans hostage for 444 days. It was
an appalling breach of international law
and a traumatic experience for our
country. I remember watching nightly
news reports in Little Rock counting the
number of days the hostages had been
held captive as the crisis went on and on
without an end in sight. It became even
more tragic when a rescue mission by
the U.S. military ended with the crash of
a helicopter and a transport plane in the
desert that killed eight servicemembers.
The Iranian Revolution led to decades
of state-sponsored terrorism. The Iranian
Islamic Revolutionary Guard and
Hezbollah, which served as an Iranian
proxy, carried out attacks across the
Middle East and the world. Their crimes
included the bombings in Beirut,
Lebanon, of the U.S. Embassy in April
1983, which killed sixty-three people,
including seventeen Americans; the
attack on the U.S. Marine barracks that
October, which killed 241 Americans;
and the 1996 bombing of Khobar
Towers in Saudi Arabia that killed
nineteen U.S. Air Force personnel and
wounded hundreds of others. Iran also
targeted Jews and Israelis, including
bombing an Israeli cultural center in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1994,
killing eighty-five people and injuring
hundreds more. On a regular basis the
State Department designated Iran as the
world’s “most active state sponsor of
terrorism” and documented its links to
bombings, kidnappings, hijackings, and
other acts of terrorism. Iranian rockets,
automatic weapons, and mortars were
also being used to kill U.S. troops as
well as our partners and civilians in Iraq
and Afghanistan.
Given this history, the prospect of a
nuclear-armed Iran represented a serious
security threat to Israel, Iran’s neighbors
in the Gulf, and, by extension, the world,
which is why the UN Security Council
had passed six resolutions since 2006,
calling on Iran to cease its weapons
program and abide by the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty. Like more than
180 other nations, Iran is a signatory to
the Treaty, which gives countries the
right to nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes but requires those with existing
nuclear weapons to pursue disarmament
and those without nuclear weapons to
foreswear acquiring them. Allowing Iran
to acquire a nuclear weapon in violation
of this treaty could open the floodgates
on proliferation, first in the Middle East
among its Sunni-led rivals, and then
around the world.
We knew Iran had worked for years to
develop the technology and materials
necessary to build a bomb, despite
condemnation and pressure from the
international community. In early 2003,
Iran possessed about a hundred
centrifuges for enriching uranium, one of
the two ways to fuel nuclear weapons,
the other being plutonium. Centrifuges
spin at incredibly fast speeds, enriching
uranium to a high enough level that it can
be used to build a bomb. This is a
difficult and precise process that
requires thousands of centrifuges. Over
the next six years, with the international
community divided and Iran denying
access and information to the
International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), it steadily expanded its
program. By the time President Obama
took office, Iran had about five thousand
centrifuges. Despite Iran’s leaders’
claims that their nuclear program was
intended for purely peaceful scientific,
medical, and commercial purposes, their
scientists were working in secret in
hardened bunkers built deep inside
mountains, enriching uranium at levels
and quantities that led reasonable people
to harbor well-founded suspicions of
their intentions.
For a brief period in the late 1990s,
there was hope that Iran might choose a
different course. In 1997, Iranians
elected as President a relative moderate,
Mohammad Khatami, who said in an
American TV interview that he wanted
to tear down the “wall of mistrust”
between Iran and the United States. The
Clinton Administration was
understandably wary in the wake of the
Khobar Towers attack, but Bill
responded with cautious reciprocal
steps, including mentioning Iran in a
video message marking Eid al Fitr, the
feast at the end of the Muslim holy month
of Ramadan. “I hope that the day will
soon come when we can enjoy once
again good relations with Iran,” he said.
The administration sent out a number of
diplomatic feelers in an attempt to start a
dialogue, including a letter delivered via
our mutual friend the Sultan of Oman. In
2000, Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright offered a more public olive
branch by formally apologizing for the
American role in the 1953 Iranian coup
and easing certain economic sanctions.
But Iran never followed through, in part
because hard-liners restrained
Khatami’s ability to act.
That groundwork may have helped
encourage Khatami to reach out after the
9/11 attacks in the hopes of cooperating
with the United States in Afghanistan,
which shares a border with Iran. But
President Bush’s speech in 2002, in
which he named Iran, Iraq, and North
Korea an “Axis of Evil,” ended any
chance of further dialogue between our
countries at that time. The Europeans
then took the lead on negotiating with
Iran over its nuclear program, but those
talks fell apart after Khatami was
replaced in 2005 by Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, a Holocaust denier and
provocateur who threatened to wipe
Israel off the map and insulted the West
at every turn.
As a Senator representing New York
during the Bush years, I advocated for
increasing pressure on the regime in
Tehran and its proxies, voting to impose
sanctions on Iran and to formally
designate the Revolutionary Guard as a
terrorist organization. As I stated again
and again, “We cannot, we should not,
we must not permit Iran to build or
acquire nuclear weapons.” Yet without a
broad international consensus, unilateral
U.S. sanctions did little to curb Iranian
behavior.
In a 2007 essay in the journal Foreign
Affairs, I argued, “The Bush
Administration refuses to talk to Iran
about its nuclear program, preferring to
ignore bad behavior rather than
challenge it.” And, “If Iran does not
comply with its own commitments and
the will of the international community,
all options must remain on the table.”
Without being specific, “options” could
be read as including potential military
action, but I emphasized that the first
choice should be diplomacy. After all, if
the United States could negotiate with
the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold
War, with thousands of their missiles
pointed at our cities, we should not be
afraid to talk with other adversaries such
as Iran under appropriate conditions.
This was a delicate balancing act—
raising the prospect of military action
while also pushing for diplomacy and
restraint—but it was hardly novel.
Effective foreign policy has always
involved the use of both sticks and
carrots, and finding the right balance
between the two is more art than
science.
During the heat of the 2008
Presidential primaries, I jumped on
Senator Obama’s statement in a debate
that he would meet with the leaders of
Iran, Syria, Venezuela, Cuba, and North
Korea “without precondition” during the
first year of a new administration.
Return to diplomacy, I said, engage with
these countries, but don’t promise to
reward them with a high-profile
Presidential meeting unless we get
something in return. In response his
campaign accused me of toeing the Bush
line and refusing to talk to our
adversaries. None of this was
particularly illuminating for voters, but
that’s life on the campaign trail. I also
caused a bit of a stir in April 2008 when
I warned Iran’s leaders that if they
launched a nuclear attack on Israel on
my watch, the United States would
retaliate and “we would be able to
totally obliterate them.” That got
Tehran’s attention, and Iran actually
filed a formal protest at the UN.
After President Obama asked me to be
Secretary of State, we started talking
about crafting a more effective approach
toward Iran. Our goal may have been
straightforward—prevent Iran from
developing nuclear weapons—but the
path to achieve it was anything but.
By early 2009, Iran appeared to be on
the rise in the Middle East. The U.S.-led
invasion of Iraq had removed Iran’s
nemesis Saddam Hussein and put in
place a Shiite government more to its
liking. U.S. power and prestige in the
region were at a low. Hezbollah had
fought Israel to a bloody stalemate in
Lebanon in 2006, and Hamas was still
firmly in control of the Gaza Strip after a
two-week Israeli invasion in January
2009. Sunni monarchs in the Gulf
watched in fear as Iran built up its
military, extended its influence, and
threatened to dominate the strategically
vital Strait of Hormuz. Inside Iran the
regime’s iron grip was unchallenged,
and it enjoyed booming oil exports.
President Ahmadinejad was a bellicose
peacock strutting on the world stage. But
the real authority rested with the
Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, who succeeded Khomeini in
1989 and made no secret of his hatred
for America. The hard-line
Revolutionary Guard was amassing such
significant power within Iran, including
vast economic holdings, that the country
appeared to be moving toward a military
dictatorship under the veneer of clerical
leadership. I made some waves when I
noted this trend during a trip to the Gulf.
Faced with this difficult landscape,
President Obama and I were determined
to use both engagement and pressure to
present Iran’s leaders with a clear
choice: If they complied with their treaty
obligations and addressed the
international community’s concerns
about their nuclear program, then they
could benefit from improved relations. If
they refused, they would face increased
isolation and even more painful
consequences.
One of President Obama’s first
gestures was to send two private letters
to Ayatollah Khamenei offering a new
diplomatic opening. He also recorded
video messages aimed directly at the
Iranian people. Like my husband’s
efforts a decade before, these feelers
were met with a stone wall in Tehran.
None of us were under any illusions that
Iran was going to change its behavior
simply because a new American
President was willing to talk. But we
believed that the effort to engage would
strengthen our hand in seeking tougher
sanctions if Iran rejected our overtures.
The rest of the world would see that the
Iranians, not the Americans, were the
intransigent ones, and that would make
them more likely to support increasing
pressure on Tehran.
An early avenue we explored was
possible cooperation on Afghanistan.
After all, back in 2001, in the early days
of the war, there had been exploratory
talks about working together to stem the
drug trade and stabilize the country.
Since then, however, Iran had played a
much less constructive role. In the leadup to a major international conference on
Afghanistan organized by the UN at The
Hague at the end of March 2009, I had to
decide whether to support the UN’s
extending an invitation to Iran. After
consulting with NATO allies, I
described the upcoming conference as “a
big tent meeting with all the parties who
have a stake and an interest in
Afghanistan.” That left the door open for
Iran; if they showed up, it would be our
first direct encounter.
Tehran ended up sending a Deputy
Foreign Minister to The Hague, whose
speech included some positive ideas for
collaboration. I did not meet with the
Iranian diplomat, but I did send Jake
Sullivan to speak with him to raise the
prospect of direct engagement on
Afghanistan.
Jake also hand-delivered a letter
requesting the release of three
Americans being detained in Iran: a
retired FBI agent named Robert
Levinson, a graduate student named Esha
Momeni, and an American journalist of
Iranian Japanese descent named Roxana
Saberi. Roxana was arrested in Tehran
and accused of espionage only days after
I took office in January 2009. After a
hunger strike and persistent lobbying by
the United States and others, she was
released in May. She came to see me at
the State Department soon after and told
me about her harrowing ordeal. Robert
Levinson is still being held. Esha
Momeni, who had been out on bail but
barred from leaving the country, was
allowed to return to the United States in
August 2009.
At the same conference at The Hague,
Richard Holbrooke had a brief exchange
with the Iranian diplomat at an official
lunch, though the Iranians later denied
the encounter took place.
The second half of 2009 turned out to
be full of unexpected developments that
dramatically reshaped the international
debate about Iran.
First came the Iranian elections. In
June, Ahmadinejad was declared the
winner of a Presidential vote that was,
by all accounts, deeply flawed if not
totally rigged. Large crowds gathered in
the streets of Tehran and throughout the
country to protest the results. It was a
surprising moment, as the Iranian middle
class demanded the democracy that the
1979 revolution had promised but never
delivered. The protests gained strength
and were known as the Green
Movement. Millions of Iranians took to
the streets in an unprecedented display
of dissent, many even calling for an end
to the regime. Security forces responded
with brutal violence. Citizens marching
peacefully were beaten with batons and
arrested en masse. Political opponents
were rounded up and abused, and
several people were killed. People
around the world were horrified by
video footage of a young woman shot
dead in the street. The violence was
shocking, but the repression was in
keeping with the regime’s abysmal
human rights record.
Within the Obama Administration we
debated how to respond. “We are
monitoring the situation as it unfolds in
Iran, but we, like the rest of the world,
are waiting and watching to see what the
Iranian people decide,” I announced as
the protests picked up steam but before
the worst of the crackdown. “We
obviously hope that the outcome reflects
the genuine will and desire of the Iranian
people.”
Contacts in Iran urged us to stay as
quiet as possible. They worried that if
the United States spoke out in support of
the demonstrators, or overtly tried to
insert ourselves into the situation, it
would allow the regime to dismiss the
protests as a foreign plot. Many of our
intelligence analysts and Iran experts
agreed. Still there was a strong
temptation to stand up and proclaim our
support for the Iranian people and our
disgust with the heavy-handed tactics of
the regime. That felt like the appropriate
role for America to play, in keeping with
our democratic values.
After listening to all the arguments,
the President grudgingly decided that we
would better serve the aspirations of the
Iranian people by not putting the United
States in the middle of the crisis. It was
a difficult, clear-eyed tactical call. It
was not, as some commentators
speculated at the time, because the
President cared more about engaging
with the regime than standing up to it.
This was about doing what we believed
was the right thing for the protesters and
for democracy, nothing more. Behind the
scenes my team at the State Department
stayed in constant contact with activists
in Iran and made an emergency
intervention to prevent Twitter from
shutting down for maintenance, which
would have deprived protesters of a key
communications tool.
In retrospect I’m not sure our restraint
was the right choice. It did not stop the
regime from ruthlessly crushing the
Green Movement, which was
exceedingly painful to watch. More
strident messages from the United States
would probably not have prevented the
outcome and might even have hastened
it, but there’s no way of knowing now if
we could have made a difference. I came
to regret that we did not speak out more
forcefully and rally others to do the
same. In the aftermath of the crackdown
in Iran, I resolved to step up efforts to
provide pro-democracy activists with
tools and technology to evade
government repression and censorship.
Over the next few years we invested tens
of millions of dollars and trained more
than five thousand activists around the
world.
By September, with Khamenei and
Ahmadinejad back firmly in control in
Tehran, there was a new flash point. For
more than a year, Western intelligence
agencies had been monitoring what was
believed to be a secret Iranian
enrichment facility under construction
beneath the mountains near the city of
Qom, southwest of Tehran. After the
debacle of faulty intelligence about
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq,
there was understandable caution in
jumping to conclusions regarding Iran,
but this was a deeply troubling
development. The facility was just
months away from completion and, if
finished, would enhance Iran’s ability to
build a nuclear bomb because of its
protected location. When the Iranians
discovered that we were aware of their
deception, they scrambled to cover it up.
On September 21, 2009, they delivered
a low-key letter to the IAEA admitting
the existence of a small pilot project
near Qom that had somehow never been
mentioned before.
We decided to expose the truth on our
own terms. That week world leaders
were gathered for the annual meeting of
the UN General Assembly in New York.
We knew that public disclosure of Iran’s
secret enrichment facility near Qom
would cause an uproar—one we hoped
to use to our advantage. President
Obama was set to chair a meeting of the
Security Council on nuclear security,
and P5+1 negotiators were about to open
a new round of talks with the Iranians.
We had to choreograph carefully the
disclosure with our British and French
allies to maximize our leverage with
both the Iranians and those countries
predisposed to give them the benefit of
the doubt, especially Russia and China.
If handled deftly, this explosive
revelation could tip the diplomatic
balance against Iran and help move us
toward tougher international sanctions.
In President Obama’s suite at the
Waldorf Astoria hotel, we huddled to
plot our strategy. One option was to
have the President make a dramatic
presentation of the intelligence about the
Qom facility at the Security Council.
That would have conjured up memories
of both the famous confrontation
between U.S. Ambassador to the UN
Adlai Stevenson and his Russian
counterpart during the Cuban Missile
Crisis and the infamous presentation by
Secretary of State Colin Powell about
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.
Neither was a precedent we wanted to
repeat. We also wanted to be sure we
had fully coordinated with our allies and
briefed the IAEA, the Russians, and the
Chinese in advance. So we decided
against the UN Security Council route.
On the afternoon of September 23,
President Obama, National Security
Advisor Jim Jones, and I met in the
Waldorf for an hour with Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev, his Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov, and his
National Security Advisor Sergei
Prikhodko and presented the evidence
about Qom. In the first meeting between
the two Presidents that spring in London,
Medvedev had admitted that Russia had
underestimated Iran’s nuclear program,
but this new information about Iranian
deception still shocked the Russians. It
was the only time in the four years I
served as Secretary that I can remember
seeing the steely Lavrov appear
flustered and at a loss for words.
Afterward Medvedev surprised the
press by talking tougher on Iran than
they’d ever heard before: “Sanctions
rarely lead to productive results—but in
some cases sanctions are inevitable.”
Reporters peppered the White House
staff with questions about what had
caused the noticeable change in Russian
rhetoric, but we weren’t ready to go
public yet with the Qom news.
Plans took shape for an announcement
two days later at the G-20 summit in
Pittsburgh, where many of the same
world leaders would travel from New
York. When the time came, President
Obama stepped to the podium alongside
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown
and French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
“The size and configuration of this
facility is inconsistent with a peaceful
program,” President Obama declared.
“Iran is breaking rules that all nations
must follow.”
Events were moving quickly now. On
the first day of October, representatives
of the P5+1 met in Geneva with an
Iranian delegation. I sent Under
Secretary of State Bill Burns to
represent the United States and meet
privately with the Iranian negotiator.
Under growing international pressure,
Iran agreed to allow IAEA inspectors to
visit the secret site near Qom, which
they did later that month.
The other item on the agenda in
Geneva was the Tehran Research
Reactor, which was given to Iran by the
United States in the 1960s to produce
medical isotopes to be used in diagnosis
and treatment of diseases. Over the
summer of 2009, Iran reported that it
was running out of the nuclear fuel rods
needed to power the reactor and produce
the isotopes. While Iran did have a
supply of low-enriched uranium, it did
not have the higher-enriched uranium
required for the fuel rods, so it asked the
IAEA for assistance in meeting their fuel
needs on the open market. This request
caught the eye of American nuclear
experts, including the State Department’s
Bob Einhorn, who began working on a
creative plan to solve several problems
at once. What if Iran sent all, or at least
a significant percentage, of its uranium
stockpile abroad, and in return got back
fuel rods that could power the research
reactor but could not be used for a
bomb? That would answer their
legitimate needs while setting back their
weapons program many months, perhaps
up to a year. If the Iranians accepted,
we’d have time to work toward a more
comprehensive deal that would answer
all our concerns about the nuclear
program. If they refused, then their true
ambitions would be exposed. In August I
had discussed the idea with Russia’s
Lavrov and argued that transferring lowenriched uranium out of Iran would
reduce tensions in the region. I hoped
that if the United States and Russia
worked together to show unity, it would
force the Iranians to respond. He agreed,
saying, “We should look at this request
seriously. We are ready in principle to
participate with you.”
Now, in the Geneva talks, it was time
to put the proposal on the table and see
how the Iranians would react. During a
lunch break Burns suggested to the chief
Iranian negotiator, Saeed Jalili, that they
have a direct discussion apart from the
bigger group. When Jalili agreed, Burns
outlined the terms we were offering.
Jalili knew he was facing a united
international community and an
undeniably fair and reasonable offer. He
had no choice but to agree. Einhorn and
the Iranian deputy negotiator went over
the details point by point. The Iranians
accepted all of it, with one proviso:
nothing could be said publicly until after
they’d gone back to Tehran and shared
the agreement with their superiors.
When the negotiators reconvened later
in the month at the IAEA in Vienna, the
Iranians had changed their tune. Jalili’s
discussions in Tehran had not gone well.
Hard-liners in the government were
dead set against the deal. Now the
Iranians were saying they were willing
to give up a smaller amount of lowenriched uranium, and they wanted to
store it in a remote part of Iran rather
than send it abroad, both of which were
unacceptable. It would defeat the whole
purpose of denying them enough
enriched uranium to make a bomb. The
IAEA urged them to return to the terms
of the original agreement, but without
success. The Vienna meetings ended in
failure. The deal was dead.
As President Obama had promised
during his campaign, we had tried to
engage Iran. Now, he decided, it was
time to ramp up the pressure and sharpen
the choice facing Iran’s leaders. To
impose real consequences, however, we
would need the rest of the world to join
us.
Susan Rice, our Ambassador to the
UN, reported that finding the votes for a
strong resolution in the Security Council
would be a hard lift. I was hearing the
same thing from my foreign counterparts.
“We don’t think this is the time to
discuss sanctions against Iran,” Chinese
Foreign Minister Yang told me in
January 2010. “Once sanctions become
the order of the day, it might be difficult
to resume talks for a considerable
period of time.” Yes, China and Russia
agreed in principle that Iran should not
be allowed to develop or possess
nuclear weapons; they just weren’t
willing to do much to stop it.
Nonetheless I believed that with the
wind now at our backs, it was worth
trying to overcome this opposition and
push tough new sanctions through the
Security Council. Throughout the spring
of 2010 we worked aggressively to
round up the votes. I threw myself into it,
with a wide-ranging diplomatic effort
that reminded me of backroom
negotiations in the Senate, with all the
horse trading, arm-twisting, vote
counting, alternating appeals to principle
and self-interest, and hard-ball politics
that go into passing major legislation.
While attention generally focuses on
the five permanent members of the
Security Council because we each have
the power to veto any resolution, there
are actually another ten seats on the
Council that rotate among other nations
selected for two-year terms by the
General Assembly. To be adopted, a
Security Council resolution must avoid a
veto but also garner nine votes out of
fifteen total members. That made small
countries with rotating seats such as
Uganda and Lebanon very important.
And it was why I spent time over my
four years courting nations that didn’t
normally play a big role in international
affairs, such as Togo, but whose votes I
knew we would need at pivotal times.
Assembling nine votes among fifteen
skittish Council members proved to be
tricky. In one of my many strategy
sessions with Britain’s David Miliband
during this period, he made the point that
it was not enough to convince China to
hold off on vetoing the resolution; we
needed affirmative support in order to
bring other undecided votes along. “On
our number counting, it otherwise seems
dicey,” he said. “There is danger if they
abstain that we may lose Nigeria,
Uganda, Brazil, Turkey.” I was doing my
own counting and did not believe we
would lose Uganda or Nigeria. Brazil
and Turkey would be another story.
“And it is still an open question if the
Russians will vote for the resolution if
the Chinese abstain,” David continued.
“We believe they will,” I responded,
“but the cost might be a weaker
resolution.” On it went.
In mid-April I made my pitch to
Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda.
Ahmadinejad was due in Uganda the
next day, as part of Iran’s diplomatic
counterattack designed to block new
sanctions, so it was crucial that I got to
Museveni first to secure his agreement.
It helped that I had known him since
1997, when I first visited his country,
and that my husband and I had kept in
touch with him since. I reminded him
that the Obama Administration had tried
to engage with Iran and that the
international community had made goodfaith offers. Iran had rejected every
entreaty, defied the international
community, and continued to enrich
uranium at high levels. I also warned
that if diplomacy failed, the result might
be military action, which no one wanted
to see. This would prove to be a
compelling argument for many wavering
countries. “We want to work with you to
send the most powerful message to Iran
and demonstrate that there still is time
for Iran to change its behavior,” I said.
Museveni was circumspect. “I will
tell [Ahmadinejad] two things,” he said.
“First, we uphold the right of all
countries to access nuclear energy for
electricity and other uses, and second,
we are totally against proliferation of
nuclear weapons. This is the message I
will put in my written speech for the
banquet. I will encourage him to open
his country to inspection if he has
nothing to hide.” I pressed the point: “If
you have your experts look at the IAEA
report where they lay out the issues, it is
hard not to have suspicions.” “I agree
with you,” he replied. “For Iran to have
nuclear weapons, that means Saudi
Arabia and Egypt will have to do the
same. That affects us directly and we
can’t support that. I will have a frank
discussion with the President.” In the
end Uganda voted for the sanctions.
As Miliband rightly observed, China
represented the key vote. If we could
convince Beijing to come around, the
rest of the Security Council would likely
fall into place. In New York, Susan Rice
and her team were working with other
delegations on language for the sanctions
resolution. The Chinese and Russians
kept trying to weaken the terms. We
made some concessions, but we saw no
point in passing another toothless
resolution. In April, President Obama
invited leaders from around the world to
Washington for a summit on nuclear
security. He took the opportunity to sit
down with Chinese President Hu Jintao
to talk about Iran. I listened as the two
Presidents went back and forth in a side
room off the main Convention Center
floor. China had extensive commercial
ties with Tehran and depended on
Iranian oil to fuel its rapid industrial
growth. President Hu agreed that Iran
should not acquire nuclear weapons, but
he was leery of any steps that felt too
aggressive. Finally the two Presidents
agreed to back “substantial” measures,
without clarifying exactly what that
would mean.
Not long afterward I followed up with
Chinese State Councilor Dai Bingguo.
China was still blocking important
elements of the draft sanctions
resolution, especially meaningful
measures on finance and banking activity
directly tied to Iran’s illicit nuclear
activities. “I must say, China’s response,
while having evolved helpfully, still
falls short of the reciprocal effort we
expected from President Hu’s
conversation with President Obama,” I
told Dai. “We need to act in a quick and
unified manner through a meaningful
resolution if we are to reduce the
growing risk of conflict in the region and
give space for a political solution.” I
said that lack of international unity and
resolve would undermine the interests
China was seeking to protect, including
maintaining stability in the Middle East,
keeping oil prices stable, and protecting
the recovery of the global economy. “We
want to avoid events that will escape
our control,” I added.
Dai admitted that he too was
dissatisfied, but he remained optimistic.
For the moment, so was I. We kept
talking to the Chinese and the Russians.
The gaps were narrowing, and it felt as
though we were getting close to an
agreement that would impose the
strictest sanctions in history.
But then, just when our goal was in
sight, events took another unexpected
turn. On May 17, 2010, in a triumphant
press conference in Tehran, the
Presidents of Brazil, Turkey, and Iran
announced they had reached an
agreement for Iran to swap low-enriched
uranium for reactor fuel rods.
Superficially their deal resembled the
offer Iran had spurned the previous
October. But in fact it was deeply
flawed. The deal did not account for the
fact that Iran had continued to enrich
uranium for several months since the
earlier proposal and the transfer of the
same amount of uranium would now
leave it with a significant stockpile.
Unlike in the October agreement,
Iranians would retain ownership of the
uranium they sent abroad and reserved
the right to pull it back at any time. Most
troubling, though, was the fact that Iran
continued to proclaim its right to enrich
uranium to higher levels, and there was
nothing in this new agreement to stop it
or even to indicate that it would discuss
the matter with the IAEA or P5+1. In
short, this agreement would address
Iran’s need to find fuel rods for its
research reactor, but it would do
precious little to answer the world’s
concerns about its illegal weapons
program. Given the timing, I was sure it
was an Iranian attempt to derail our push
for sanctions at the UN—and there was a
good chance it would succeed.
Ever since the October 2009
agreement collapsed, Turkey and Brazil
had been making noises about revisiting
it. Both countries held rotating seats on
the UN Security Council and were eager
to exercise increased influence on the
world stage. They were prime examples
of the “emerging powers” whose rapid
economic growth was fueling big
ambitions for regional and global clout.
They also happened to have two
confident leaders in Luiz Inácio Lula da
Silva of Brazil and Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan of Turkey, both of whom
considered themselves to be men of
action able to bend history to their will.
Once they had set their sights on
brokering a solution on Iran, there was
little that could dissuade them from
trying, even if only lackluster—or even
counterproductive—results emerged.
The United States and the other
permanent members of the Security
Council reacted cautiously to Brazil and
Turkey’s early efforts. After so much
duplicity, we worried that Iran might
exploit the good intentions of Brazil and
Turkey in order to protect its nuclear
program and fracture the growing
international consensus against it. Our
concerns grew as it became clear that
the Iranians had no intention of stopping
their enrichment activities and were
suggesting they would give up their
uranium in small batches rather than in
one big shipment, as originally
envisioned. Over time that would mean
they would never be without enough
nuclear material to build a bomb.
In early March 2010, I visited Lula in
Brasília. I explained why this would be
a bad outcome and tried to dissuade him
from pursuing it, but Lula would not be
deterred. He rejected my view that Iran
was only playing for time. During my
visit I explained publicly, “The door is
open for negotiation. We never slammed
it shut. But we don’t see anybody even in
the far-off distance walking toward it.” I
went on: “We see an Iran that runs to
Brazil, an Iran that runs to Turkey, an
Iran that runs to China, telling different
things to different people to avoid
international sanctions.”
President Obama followed up with a
letter to Lula in April underscoring our
concerns: “Iran appears to be pursuing a
strategy that is designed to create the
impression of flexibility without
agreeing to actions that can begin to
build mutual trust and confidence.” He
conveyed the same message to Erdoğan
in Turkey. Meanwhile, lending credence
to our argument, Iran pledged to continue
enriching uranium. Their only goal
seemed to be to derail the sanctions
drive at the UN.
With Lula set to visit Tehran, I called
Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso
Amorim and urged him to see the Iranian
efforts for what they were, “an elaborate
dance.” But he was full of confidence
for what could be achieved. Finally I
grew exasperated and exclaimed, “There
has to be an end to the process. At some
point, there has to be a day of
reckoning.” Amorim argued that it might
be easier for the Iranians to make a deal
with Brazil and Turkey than with the
United States. I doubted something
positive could come from the meeting
and worried that it was happening at a
particularly precarious time because we
were finally close to an agreement with
the Chinese and Russians on the text of a
new sanctions resolution at the UN.
Neither Moscow nor Beijing were
particularly enthusiastic about the
process, and I sensed that if they saw an
opportunity to bolt and give Iran more
time, they would take it in a flash.
That was my immediate concern when
I saw the news that Lula, Erdoğan, and
Ahmadinejad had reached an agreement.
In case there was any doubt, Amorim
confirmed it at a press conference. “This
plan is a route for dialogue and takes
away any grounds for sanctions,” he
said.
When we spoke afterward, the
Foreign Ministers of Brazil and Turkey
both tried to sell me on the merits of the
deal. They reported on their tough
eighteen-hour negotiations and tried to
convince me that they had succeeded. I
think they were surprised that their
triumph was being greeted with such
skepticism. But I wanted to see action
from Iran, not more words. “We have a
saying that the proof is in the pudding,” I
told Amorim. “I agree that the tasting of
the pudding is key, but there must be
time to get the spoon out and have time
to try it,” he replied. To that I replied,
“This pudding has been in for over a
year now!”
The urgent question now was whether
we could hold together the sanctions
resolution in the face of this new gambit.
We had an agreement in principle with
China and Russia, which I hurried to
announce as soon as possible after the
press conference in Tehran. But until
votes were actually cast in New York,
nothing was set in stone. When Beijing
issued a cautious statement welcoming
the Brazil-Turkey deal, I could feel the
ground beginning to shift. Fortunately I
was scheduled to fly to China a few days
later for high-level talks with the
Chinese leadership. Iran would be at the
top of the agenda, alongside North
Korea and the South China Sea.
Over a long dinner with Dai Bingguo
at the Diaoyutai Guesthouse, we talked
through the issue. I walked through our
objections to the Brazil-Turkey proposal
and reminded Dai of the long record of
Iranian double-dealing, including the
deception at Qom. It was time to resolve
any remaining issues with the text of the
sanctions resolution, I said. As usual,
Dai was thoughtful but firm, with his eye
on both the sweep of history and the
bottom line. China was uncomfortable
with the international community
imposing penalties on states except in
the most egregious instances, and it
certainly did not want any of its
commercial interests threatened by
sanctions. Compounding their
reluctance, only a year earlier we had
gone through a similar exercise when
seeking to impose tougher sanctions on
North Korea. So we were asking them to
hold their nose and go along for the
second time in as many years.
I reminded Dai that China’s main
interest in the Middle East was stability,
which ensured the steady flow of oil. If
our push for sanctions at the UN failed,
there would continue to be the potential
for military confrontation. That could
spike the price of oil and wreak havoc
with the global economy. Alternatively,
if China chose to reduce its commercial
ties to Iran, we could help it find other
sources of energy. In the end, I was
blunt. This is important to us, I told Dai.
If we’re going to build a cooperative
relationship, as Presidents Obama and
Hu had pledged, then we need China to
be with us at the Security Council.
By the conclusion of the evening, I felt
I had put the process back on track. I
cemented that impression in discussions
over the next few days with President
Hu and Premier Wen. The drive toward
new sanctions could continue. “We are
pleased with the cooperation that we’ve
received. We have a P5+1 consensus,” I
announced after my meetings in Beijing.
All that was left to do was work out the
fine print. “There is a recognition on the
part of the international community that
the agreement that was reached in
Tehran a week ago between Iran, Brazil
and Turkey only occurred because the
Security Council was on the brink of
publicly releasing the text of the
resolution that we have been negotiating
for many weeks. It was a transparent
ploy to avoid Security Council action.”
The vote in New York was set for
June 9. Susan and her team were still
going back and forth with the Chinese on
the final list of specific Iranian
companies and banks to sanction, and
we were mounting a final push to get
more of the nonpermanent members of
the Security Council on board. At a
minimum we wanted to see abstentions
rather than nays.
Meanwhile I had to attend a meeting
of the Organization of American States
in Lima, Peru. It turned out to be a
fortuitous detour. China’s Ambassador
to the United States, Zhang Yesui, was
also in town to attend the OAS meeting,
and I invited him to my hotel for a drink.
I hoped we could settle the sanctions list
once and for all. The J. W. Marriott in
Lima is perched atop the Costa Verde
cliffs, with a striking view of the
Pacific. When Ambassador Zhang
arrived, I led him over to a quiet table in
the bar where we could talk. I had been
visiting with members of the State
Department press corps, who were
enjoying pisco sours, a local favorite
that mixes Peruvian liquor with lime
juice, egg whites, and bitters, and many
of the reporters remained at the bar.
They had no idea that negotiations were
going on right under their nose. At one
point an ebullient Mark Landler of the
New York Times approached our table
bearing two pisco sours. Who says
diplomacy can’t be effective and fun at
the same time? I smiled and accepted.
Zhang politely followed suit. And there,
over Peruvian cocktails, we reached a
final understanding on the sanctions
designations.
The UN Security Council passed
Resolution 1929 by a vote of 12 to 2. It
imposed the strictest sanctions in history
on Iran, targeting the Revolutionary
Guard, arms sales, and financial
transactions. Only Turkey and Brazil,
still unhappy about their failed
diplomatic maneuver, voted no. Lebanon
abstained after last-minute outreach by
me, Vice President Biden, and
Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, a
prominent Lebanese American. I had
called Lebanese President Michel
Suleiman hours before from Colombia
and urged him not to vote no, which he
was inclined to do based on his political
necessities at home. I knew he was
navigating some difficult decisions, and
I was pleased with the abstention.
The resolution was far from perfect—
securing consensus with Russia and
China had required compromises—but I
was proud of what we had achieved.
During the Bush years Iran had managed
to play the world’s great powers against
one another and avoided serious
international sanctions for its misdeeds.
The Obama Administration changed that.
Despite our success, I knew this was
just the beginning. The UN resolution
opened the door for much tougher
additional unilateral sanctions by the
United States and other countries. We
had coordinated with Congressional
leaders throughout this process, and
soon Congress approved a law that
would hit even harder at Iran’s economy.
I was also talking to our European
partners about new steps they would
take as well.
Even as the pressure built, we kept the
offer of engagement on the table. In
December 2010, I traveled to Bahrain
for a conference on security in the
Persian Gulf. We knew that a delegation
of Iranian diplomats was also expected
to attend. Despite the brief contacts
made at previous summits by Richard
Holbrooke and Jake Sullivan, I had
never yet come face-to-face with an
Iranian counterpart. I decided to use the
opportunity to send a message. In the
middle of my speech at a gala dinner in a
Ritz-Carlton ballroom, I paused and
said, “At this time, I would like to
address directly the delegation at this
conference from the government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.” The room
grew still. The Iranian Foreign Minister
Manouchehr Mottaki was sitting just a
few seats away. “Nearly two years ago,
President Obama extended your
government a sincere offer of dialogue.
We are still committed to this offer,” I
said. “You have the right to a peaceful
nuclear program. But with that right
comes a reasonable responsibility: that
you follow the treaty you signed, and
fully address the world’s concern about
your nuclear activities. We urge you to
make that choice—for your people, your
interests, and our shared security.”
Afterward, as dinner was breaking up
and everyone was shaking hands, I
called out to Mottaki, “Hello, Minister!”
He muttered something in Farsi and
turned away. A few minutes later we ran
into each other again, outside in the
driveway. I offered another friendly
greeting, and again he refused to reply. I
smiled to myself. In his first inaugural
address, President Obama had told Iran
and other pariah states that we would
“extend a hand if you are willing to
unclench your fist.” Mottaki had just
demonstrated how hard this was to
achieve. But, in fairness, we had just
successfully campaigned around the
world to impose crippling sanctions on
his country. Engagement and pressure.
Carrots and sticks. This was the nature
of diplomacy, and we were playing a
long game.

This was the backdrop against which, in
January 2011, the Sultan of Oman made
his offer to me of secret direct talks with
Iran. Engagement through the P5+1
process had stalled. Intercession by
well-intentioned third parties had also
failed. Again and again Iran had proven
to be intransigent and untrustworthy. Yet
there was reason to think that, despite all
this, the Sultan might actually be able to
deliver. After all, he had done it in the
case of the imprisoned American hikers.
Back in July 2009, three young
Americans were arrested by Iranian
security forces while hiking in the
mountainous border area between
northern Iraq and Iran and charged with
espionage. Joshua Fattal, Shane Bauer,
and Sarah Shourd were living and
working among the Kurds of northern
Iraq, and there was no reason to suspect
them of being spies. From Washington it
was impossible to know exactly what
happened or even whether or not the trio
had strayed across the border. But the
incident echoed the kidnapping of two
American journalists near the border
between China and North Korea just a
few months before and posed an
immediate problem. As in North Korea,
we had no diplomatic relations with Iran
and no embassy in Tehran to provide
assistance. We had to rely on the Swiss
as our formal “protecting power” to
represent us. But the Iranians initially
refused to grant consular access to the
Swiss diplomats, meaning nobody was
allowed to visit the detained Americans,
as required under the Vienna Convention
that governs diplomatic relations among
nations. I made a public appeal for the
hikers’ release, which I repeated
frequently over the following months,
and enlisted the Swiss to send private
messages as well.
We stayed in close touch with the
hikers’ distraught families, and in
November, I invited them to my office at
the State Department so we could meet
in person. It took months for the Swiss
Ambassador in Tehran to get into the
notorious Evin Prison to see the three
Americans. They had been held for
months without formal charges or access
to legal representation. With the help of
the Swiss, the mothers of the hikers were
given visas to travel to Iran just after
Mother’s Day. I met with them again
before they left and sent my prayers with
them to Tehran. They were permitted a
tearful reunion with their children but
were not allowed to bring them home.
The whole scene was used by Iran as a
publicity stunt.
Throughout this ordeal I tried every
back channel we could find to persuade
the Iranians to release the hikers. I asked
Jake Sullivan to take on the project. At a
conference in Kabul, Afghanistan, in the
summer of 2010, I sent Jake to hand the
Iranian Foreign Minister a message
about the hikers, just as we had done the
year before in The Hague for the other
detained Americans. But the key contact
was in Oman. One of the Sultan’s top
advisors approached Dennis Ross,
President Obama’s top Iran advisor, and
offered to serve as a go-between.
The Omanis were as good as their
word. In September 2010, Sarah Shourd
was released on bail. Once she left Iran,
I called the Sultan to thank him and see
what could be done about the remaining
two hikers (it would take another year to
win their release as well). “We are
always ready to do what’s right to help,”
the Sultan told me. His comment was
still in my head as we sat and talked in
January 2011.
Freeing a detained hiker was a far cry
from facilitating sensitive talks about the
future of Iran’s nuclear program. But the
Sultan had shown he could get results.
So I listened carefully to his proposal
for a new substantive back channel, and
I asked if we could be sure that the
Iranian side would actually be
authorized to negotiate in good faith.
After all, we’d invested lots of time in
the P5+1 process, only to see the
agreement made in the room overruled
back in Tehran. The Sultan couldn’t
make any promises, but he wanted to try.
I agreed that if we proceeded, absolute
secrecy would be needed. We didn’t
want another circus with lots of
posturing for the press and political
pressure from back home. Even under
the best of circumstances, this was a
long shot. But it was worth testing. I told
the Sultan I would talk with President
Obama and my colleagues in Washington
but that we should begin thinking about
how to put his plan into motion.
For the next several months, we
proceeded cautiously. There were real
concerns about whom we would be
talking to and what their motivations
were. President Obama was wary, but
interested. He called the Sultan himself
at one point to probe the viability of the
diplomatic channel. We kept the circle
small. Bill Burns, Jake, and I worked
with a tight team at the White House that
included Tom Donilon, by then the
National Security Advisor; his Deputy,
Denis McDonough; Dennis Ross, until
his departure in November 2011; and
Puneet Talwar, the national security
staff’s Senior Director for Iran, Iraq, and
the Gulf States. The Omanis passed
messages back and forth with us about
how talks might take shape and what
kind of delegation would be sent. To no
one’s surprise, it was difficult to get
straight answers out of the Iranians on
even the simplest questions.
In the fall our confidence about
proceeding took a hit when U.S. law
enforcement and intelligence agencies
uncovered an Iranian plot to assassinate
the Saudi Ambassador in Washington.
An Iranian national was arrested at the
airport in New York and confessed to an
elaborate scheme right out of a show
like 24 or Homeland. It involved
attempting to recruit a Mexican drug
cartel to bomb a restaurant where the
Ambassador was known to eat.
Fortunately the Mexican hit man turned
out to be an informant for the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration. We had
evidence suggesting the conspiracy was
conceived, sponsored, and directed by
senior officials in Iran. Not long after,
the chief of Iran’s Navy unnerved global
markets by warning that it could close
the Strait of Hormuz at any time, which
would choke off much of the world’s oil
supplies.
At this point, in October 2011, I
decided to return to Muscat and pay a
second visit to the Sultan. He was still
keen to get talks going and suggested that
we send an advance team to Oman to
discuss the logistical issues in person,
since passing messages wasn’t going so
well. I agreed, so long as the Iranians
were serious, and the Sultan could
provide us with assurances that they
would speak for the supreme leader. I
also urged the Sultan to convey a stern
warning to the Iranians about the Strait
of Hormuz. After the conversation, we
began making secret arrangements to
send Jake and Puneet and a small team to
begin these conversations. Senator John
Kerry talked to an Omani close to the
Sultan and kept us informed of what he
heard.
For the delicate first meeting with the
Iranians, Jake was not the most
experienced diplomat at the State
Department I could have chosen, but he
was discreet and had my absolute
confidence. His presence would send a
powerful message that I was personally
invested in this process. In early July
2012, Jake quietly left one of my trips in
Paris and caught his own flight to
Muscat. His destination was such a
closely held secret that other members of
my traveling team, colleagues who
worked with him around the clock both
at home and on the road, assumed that he
had a family emergency of some kind
and were worried about him.
Remarkably they did not learn of his true
mission until reading about it in the
press more than a year later.
Once on the ground in Oman, Jake and
Puneet slept on the couch at an empty
embassy house. The Iranian advance
team came with a series of demands and
preconditions, none of which was
acceptable. They were there, which was
something in and of itself, but clearly
skittish, perhaps reflecting an ambivalent
and divided leadership back in Tehran.
Jake reported his impression that the
Iranians weren’t yet ready to engage
seriously. We agreed to keep the channel
open and to wait and see if conditions
improved.
Throughout this period, even as we
pursued this secret avenue of
engagement, we worked steadily to
increase international pressure on the
Iranian regime and counter its aggressive
ambitions. One priority was to expand
our military partnerships in the Gulf and
deploy new military resources across
the region to reassure our partners and
deter Iranian aggression. We stayed in
close and constant coordination with
Israel and took unprecedented steps to
protect its military superiority over any
potential rivals. I asked Andrew
Shapiro, my longtime Senate aide and
now Assistant Secretary of State for
Political-Military Affairs, to help make
sure Israel was equipped with highly
advanced weapons systems like the F-35
Joint Strike Fighter. We worked with the
Israelis to develop and build a
multilayered air defense network that
included upgraded versions of the
Patriot missiles originally deployed in
the 1991 Gulf War, new advanced early
warning radar, antirocket batteries
called “the Iron Dome,” and other
systems to protect against ballistic
missiles known as “David’s Sling” and
the “Arrow-3 Interceptor.” During the
conflict with Hamas in Gaza in late
2012, the Iron Dome proved effective in
protecting Israeli homes and
communities.
I also spent many hours with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
discussing our dual-track strategy and
trying to convince him that sanctions
could work. We agreed that a credible
threat of military force was important—
which is why President Obama and I
repeatedly said “All options are on the
table”—but we had different views on
how much we should telegraph in
public. I told him that President Obama
was serious when he said we would not
allow Iran to acquire a nuclear bomb
and that “containment” was not our
policy. Containment might have worked
with the Soviet Union, but given Iran’s
ties to terrorism and the volatility of the
region, we didn’t think a nuclear-armed
Iran was any more acceptable—or
containable—than the Israelis did. So all
options really were on the table,
including military force.
In addition to our work with the
Israelis, the Obama Administration also
increased America’s own sea and air
presence in the Persian Gulf and
deepened our ties to the Gulf
monarchies, who viewed Iran with great
alarm. I worked with the Gulf
Cooperation Council on a dedicated
ongoing security dialogue, and we
conducted joint military exercises with
GCC members. Convincing Turkey to
host a major radar installation also
helped us build a new missile defense
system that would protect our allies in
Europe from a possible Iranian attack.
Even as we shored up our defenses,
we also went on the offense to increase
pressure on Iran in the hopes of changing
its leaders’ calculus. Through legislation
and executive action, the Obama
Administration and Congress worked
together to pile on tougher and tougher
sanctions, all building on the original
Security Council measures put in place
in the summer of 2010. Our goal was to
put so much financial pressure on Iran’s
leaders, including on the military’s
growing number of business ventures,
that they would have no choice but to
come back to the negotiating table with a
serious offer. We would go after Iran’s
oil industry, banks, and weapons
programs. And we would enlist
insurance companies, shipping lines,
energy traders, financial institutions, and
many other actors to cut Iran off from
global commerce. Most of all, I would
make it my mission to convince the top
consumers of Iran’s oil to diversify their
supplies and buy less from Tehran. With
each one who agreed, Iran’s coffers took
another big hit. Iran’s lifeblood was its
oil; it was the world’s third largest
exporter of crude, which brought in
much-needed hard currency. So we did
everything we could to make it harder
for Iran to do business, particularly
around oil.
The Europeans were essential
partners in this effort, and when all
twenty-seven members of the European
Union agreed to impose a full boycott of
Iranian oil, it was a huge blow. Bob
Einhorn, the expert who helped craft the
original October 2009 Tehran Research
Reactor swap plan, and Under Secretary
of Treasury David Cohen went to work
finding the most creative and effective
ways to enforce all our new sanctions.
Freezing the assets of Iranian banks
made it impossible for Iranian tankers to
buy insurance on the international market
and cut off access to global financial
networks. It was a full-court press.
Under a new law signed by President
Obama in December 2011, other
countries had to demonstrate every six
months that they were meaningfully
reducing consumption of Iranian oil or
face sanctions themselves. To put this
into practice, I turned to our newly
created Bureau of Energy Resources,
headed by Carlos Pascual. Everywhere
Iran tried to sell its oil, our team was
there, offering up alternative suppliers
and explaining the financial risks of
conducting a transaction with a global
pariah. Iran’s major customers faced
difficult choices with significant
economic consequences. Thankfully
many of them showed far-sighted
leadership by embracing the opportunity
to diversify their energy portfolios.
We were just as active in places like
Angola, Nigeria, South Sudan, and the
Persian Gulf, encouraging Iran’s
competitors to pump and sell more of
their own oil, to keep the market
balanced and prevent damaging price
spikes. Iraq’s resurgent oil industry, long
a U.S. priority, proved invaluable. But
the most crucial new supplies came from
our own backyard. As American
domestic oil and gas production
increased dramatically, thanks to new
technologies and exploration, our energy
imports plummeted. This took pressure
off the global market and made it easier
to exclude Iran, as other nations could
rely on the supply America no longer
required.
The biggest consumers of Iranian oil,
and the hardest to convince to turn off
the spigot, were in Asia. China and
India, in particular, depended on Iranian
oil to meet their rapidly expanding
energy needs. The advanced economies
of South Korea and Japan were also
highly dependent on imported oil. Japan
faced an added burden because of the
meltdown of the Fukushima nuclear plant
and the resulting moratorium on nuclear
power. Nonetheless the Japanese
pledged to cut their consumption of
Iranian oil significantly, a courageous
commitment under the circumstances.
India, by contrast, initially publicly
refused Western entreaties to reduce
their reliance on Iranian oil. In our
private conversations Indian leaders
agreed that peace in the Middle East
was important and were acutely aware
that 6 million Indians lived and worked
in the Gulf and could be vulnerable to
political or economic instability. At the
same time, though, India’s fast-growing
economy depended on a steady supply of
energy, and they worried that their
energy needs were so great that there
was no viable way to meet them without
Iranian oil. Left unsaid was another
reason for their reluctance: India, which
had championed the “nonaligned
movement” during the Cold War and
still prized its “strategic autonomy,”
simply hated to be told what to do. The
more loudly we urged them to change
course, the more likely they were to dig
in their heels.
In May 2012, I visited New Delhi to
make the case in person. I argued that
maintaining a unified international front
was the best way to persuade Iran to
return to the negotiating table, achieve a
diplomatic solution to the impasse, and
avoid a destabilizing military conflict. I
outlined the advantages of a diversified
energy supply and talked about potential
alternatives to Iran available on the
market. I also assured the Indians that, if
they took positive steps, we would make
clear that it was their decision, however
they chose to characterize it. All we
cared about was the end result, not
beating our chest. That seemed to make a
difference. When Minister of External
Affairs S. M. Krishna and I went out to
talk to the media, we were of course
asked about the Iran issue. I deferred to
Krishna to answer first. “Given our
growing demand, it is natural for us to
try and diversify our sources of imports
of oil and gas to meet the objective of
energy security,” he said. “Since you
asked a specific question about Iran, it
remains an important source of oil for
us, although its share in our imports are
declining, which is well known.
Ultimately, it reflects the decision that
refineries make based on commercial,
financial and technical considerations.”
That was good enough for me. I
promised Krishna that I would send
Carlos and his team of experts to Delhi
to help speed those “totally non-Iranrelated” decisions.
In the end our efforts led to every
major Iranian customer, even the most
reluctant, agreeing to reduce their
purchases of Iran’s oil. The result was
dramatic. Inflation in Iran soared by
more than 40 percent, and the value of
the Iranian currency declined
dramatically. Oil exports declined from
2.5 million barrels of crude each day in
early 2012 to around 1 million, which
resulted in a loss of more than $80
billion in revenue.
Iranian oil tankers sat idle, with no
markets to visit and no foreign investors
or insurance companies willing to back
them, and Iranian jets rusted in their
hangars, with no replacement parts
available. Big multinational companies
like Shell, Toyota, and Deutsche Bank
began pulling out of Iran. Even
Ahmadinejad, who long tried to deny
that sanctions would have any effect,
began complaining about the “economic
assault.”
For years I had been talking about
“crippling sanctions,” and now it was
coming true. Bibi Netanyahu told me he
liked the phrase so much that he had
adopted it as his own. I took pride in the
coalition we assembled and the
effectiveness of our efforts, but no
pleasure in the hardship that Iran’s
people suffered because of their leaders’
choice to continue defying the
international community. We made every
effort to ensure that the sanctions didn’t
deprive Iranians of food, medicines, and
other humanitarian goods. And I looked
for opportunities to emphasize that our
quarrel was with the government of Iran,
not its citizens, including in an interview
broadcast in Farsi on Voice of
America’s Parazit program, Iran’s
equivalent of The Daily Show. The
people of Iran deserved a better future,
but that would not be possible unless
their leaders changed course.
Through it all, Iran remained defiant.
It continued to be linked to new terrorist
plots around the world, in Bulgaria,
Georgia, and Thailand. Tehran worked
to undermine neighboring governments
and incited unrest from Bahrain to
Yemen and beyond. It poured money and
weapons into Syria to prop up its ally
Bashar al-Assad and support his brutal
crackdown against the Syrian people.
Eventually it sent in Revolutionary
Guard trainers and Hezbollah fighters to
further bolster Assad. And, of course, it
continued to advance its nuclear
program in violation of Security Council
resolutions and refused to engage in
good faith with the P5+1. In public
President Obama and I stressed that the
window for diplomacy was still open
but that it would not remain so forever.
In private we maintained some hope that
the Omani channel would ultimately
yield progress. The more pressure we
mounted and the more the Iranian
economy crumbled, the more incentive
Tehran had to reconsider its posture.

That’s exactly what started happening
toward the end of 2012, just as my time
at the State Department began to draw to
a close. Iran’s economy, regional
position, and international reputation
were all in shambles. President
Ahmadinejad’s second term was a
disaster, and his political standing at
home had collapsed, along with his once
close relationship with the Supreme
Leader and other powerful
conservatives and clerics who truly held
the levers of power in Iran. Meanwhile
the Omanis indicated that the Iranians
were finally getting ready to move
forward on the long-awaited secret
talks. They wanted to send a Deputy
Foreign Minister to meet with my
Deputy Bill Burns in Muscat. We
agreed.
In March 2013, a few weeks after my
term as Secretary ended, Bill and Jake
returned to Oman to see what this new
opening might yield. The answer was
still disappointing. The Iranians seemed
to be struggling with what to do. Some
elements of their government clearly
favored serious engagement, but other
powerful forces were holding the
negotiators back. Once again our team
came home with the impression that the
time was not yet ripe for a breakthrough.
Then events intervened once more.
That spring Iran geared up for new
elections to replace Ahmadinejad as
President. It was hard to believe it had
already been four years since massive
protests filled the streets of Tehran after
the previous vote. Since then the regime
had been ruthless in driving political
opposition underground and stamping
out dissent. In keeping with this record,
the authorities handpicked every
candidate in the 2013 race and
disqualified anyone not deemed
conservative or loyal enough. They even
barred Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a
leader of the 1979 revolution, former
President, and influential cleric, because
he was perceived to present a challenge
to the regime. The eight candidates who
made it through all had close ties to the
Supreme Leader and solid regime
credentials. In short, the powers that be
in Iran were playing it as safe as
possible.
Saeed Jalili, the country’s dogmatic
nuclear negotiator, was seen as the
Ayatollah’s preferred choice and
therefore the presumed front-runner. He
campaigned on vacuous slogans about
“Islamic development” and avoided
talking much about the failing economy
or questioning Iran’s disastrous foreign
policy. Out among the people, there
seemed to be little interest or excitement
for the election, which was the regime’s
goal. But frustration was not hard to
find. Western media quoted a forty-yearold garage owner outside Qom, the city
with the secret nuclear facility unmasked
in 2009, grumbling about the economy:
“I love Islam, but how do we fix 100
percent inflation? I’ll vote for anybody
with a good plan, but until now I haven’t
seen any candidate with clear ideas for
the future.”
Then, in the final days before the June
election, something remarkable
happened. In the middle of the regime’s
carefully orchestrated election, these
frustrations burst into public view, and
the contradictions and failures of the
regime’s policies were suddenly being
questioned before the entire country. In
an explosive nationally televised debate,
Jalili’s opponents went after him
aggressively for his mismanagement of
the country’s nuclear policy and the
terrible toll it had taken on the economy.
“Being conservative does not mean
being inflexible and stubborn,” said AliAkbar Velayati, a former Foreign
Minister with a reputation as a hardliner. “We can’t expect everything and
give nothing,” Mohsen Rezaei, a former
senior commander in the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard, piled on,
questioning the mantra of resistance
against the world. “Do you mean that we
have to resist and keep people hungry?”
he asked. Jalili tried to defend his
stonewalling at the most recent P5+1
talks—“They wanted to exchange a
jewel for candy,” he protested—and
invoked the Supreme Leader in his
defense. But that didn’t stop the attacks.
Hassan Rouhani, a former chief nuclear
negotiator himself and the closest person
to a moderate in the race because of his
talk of “constructive interaction with the
world,” slammed Jalili for allowing Iran
to be sanctioned at the UN Security
Council. “All of our problems stem from
this,” he said. “It’s good to have
centrifuges running, providing people’s
lives and sustenance are also spinning.”
Iranians watching at home must have
been in a state of shock. They had rarely
been allowed to witness a debate like
this before.
On Election Day, in June 2013,
Iranians turned out in surprisingly large
numbers and elected Rouhani in a
landslide. This time there would be no
attempt to reverse the results or steal the
election. Crowds gathered in the streets
chanting, “Long live reform.” Rouhani
took office in August and immediately
began making conciliatory statements
toward the international community and
even tweeted good wishes on Rosh
Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
I was now a private citizen, but I
watched all this with great interest and a
healthy dose of skepticism. The Supreme
Leader still held all the real power,
especially when it came to the nuclear
program and foreign policy. He had
allowed Rouhani’s election and was so
far tolerating all this talk of a new
direction, even quietly defending the
new President against attacks from
unsettled hard-liners, all of which
perhaps meant that he understood how
unsustainable the regime’s policies had
become. But there was no reason yet to
believe that he had fundamentally
decided to change course on any of the
core issues at the heart of Iran’s
belligerence toward its region and much
of the world.
But behind the scenes, after the
election of Rouhani, the Omani channel
was heating up. The Sultan was the first
foreign leader to visit Rouhani in
Tehran. President Obama sent another
letter and this time got a positive
response. In Muscat, Bill and Jake, who
was by this time Vice President Biden’s
National Security Advisor, resumed
meeting with Iranian officials, who were
finally empowered to negotiate from the
highest levels. Maintaining strict secrecy
was more important than ever, to
preserve Rouhani’s fragile credibility
back home. Relatively quickly the
outlines of a preliminary deal began to
take shape. Iran would halt advances in
its nuclear program and allow new
inspections for six months in exchange
for modest sanctions relief. That would
open a window for intense negotiations
to address the international community’s
concerns and resolve all outstanding
issues. Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs Wendy Sherman, an
experienced negotiator and the first
woman to hold that position, joined the
discussions in Oman and helped hammer
out the details.
The teams also discussed the
possibility of a historic face-to-face
meeting between Presidents Obama and
Rouhani in New York at the UN General
Assembly in late September. At the very
last minute, however, the Iranians failed
to deliver on the meeting, an indication
that divisions and misgivings continued
inside the regime. But the two leaders
did speak on the phone—as Rouhani’s
limousine was driving him to the airport
for his flight home. It was the first such
conversation since 1979. My successor,
Secretary Kerry, met with the new
Iranian Foreign Minister, Javad Zarif,
and the administration began briefing
key allies about the progress achieved in
the secret talks. Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu warned in a speech to the UN
that Rouhani was a “wolf in sheep’s
clothing.”
In October, the secret Oman channel
began to merge with the official P5+1
process in Geneva that Wendy Sherman
had been leading for the United States.
Bill and Jake participated, but they took
elaborate measures to stay out of sight of
the press, including staying at a separate
hotel and going in and out of service
entrances.
In November, Secretary Kerry flew to
Geneva twice in the hopes of pushing the
negotiations over the finish line. There
were still big concerns to work out:
Would Iran stop all enrichment of
uranium, or could it be allowed to
continue enriching to a level far below
what was needed for a bomb? For
Rouhani, maintaining even a low level
of enrichment provided him important
political cover. But the Israelis and
others thought that such a concession
would set a dangerous precedent. Then
there was the question of how much
sanctions relief to provide. Again some
were against giving any ground unless
Iran took irreversible and verifiable
steps to dismantle its nuclear program.
Bibi scoffed that the P5+1 was
preparing to offer Iran the “deal of the
century” on a silver platter.
Kerry and Wendy pressed ahead with
President Obama’s backing and, along
with our partners, managed to fashion a
compromise. Iran agreed to eliminate its
stockpile of higher-enriched uranium and
continue enriching only to 5 percent (far
below weapons grade); keep thousands
of centrifuges offline, including all of its
next-generation centrifuges; allow
intrusive inspections; and stop work on
new facilities, including a plutonium
reactor. In return the international
community would provide several
billion dollars in sanctions relief, mostly
from previously frozen Iranian assets.
From the White House President Obama
hailed the deal as “an important first
step toward a comprehensive solution”
and credited years of patient diplomacy
and pressure.
When we came into office back in
2009, the international community was
fractured, diplomacy was stalled, and
the Iranians were marching steadily
toward a nuclear weapon. Our dualtrack strategy of engagement and
pressure reversed those trends, united
the world, and finally forced Iran back
to the negotiating table. I remained
skeptical that the Iranians would deliver
a final comprehensive agreement; I had
seen too many false hopes dashed over
the years to allow myself to get too
optimistic now. But this was the most
promising development in a long time,
and it was worth testing to see what
could be achieved.
Although it took five years to get this
initial deal, the hardest work was still
ahead. All the tough issues that had
bedeviled Iran’s relationship with the
international community are still
unresolved. And even if the nuclear
issue was eventually satisfactorily
settled by an enforceable agreement,
Iran’s support for terrorism and its
aggressive behavior in the region would
remain a threat to the national security of
the United States and our allies.
Going forward, Iran’s leaders—its
Supreme Leader in particular—face real
choices about the future. At the time of
the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Iran’s
economy was nearly 40 percent larger
than Turkey’s; in 2014 this is reversed.
Is the country’s nuclear program worth
beggaring an illustrious civilization and
impoverishing a proud people? If Iran
had a nuclear weapon tomorrow, would
that create even one more job for a
country where millions of young people
are out of work? Would it send one more
Iranian to college or rebuild the roads
and ports still crumbling from the war
with Iraq a generation ago? When
Iranians look abroad, would they rather
end up like North Korea or South
Korea?
19

Syria: A Wicked
Problem

History is a somber judge—and it will
judge us all harshly if we prove
incapable of taking the right path today,”
said Kofi Annan as he looked around the
table at the Ministers who had answered
his invitation to come to Geneva’s
Palais des Nations at the end of June
2012 in hopes of resolving the bloody
civil war raging in Syria.
Kofi had been through his share of
difficult diplomatic negotiations. As the
seventh Secretary-General of the United
Nations, from 1997 to 2006, the softspoken Ghanaian had won the Nobel
Peace Prize. “Collectively, you have the
potential to wield tremendous power
and to change the direction of this
crisis,” he told us. “By being here today,
you suggest the intention to show that
leadership.” Yet, as Kofi knew well,
opinion in the room was sharply divided
over what kind of leadership was
actually needed.
The crisis began in early 2011, when
Syrian citizens, inspired in part by the
successful peaceful protests in Tunisia
and Egypt, took to the streets to
demonstrate against the authoritarian
regime of Bashar al-Assad. As in Libya,
security forces responded with
excessive force and mass detentions,
which in turn eventually led some
Syrians to take up arms to defend
themselves and, eventually, to try to
topple Assad. It was a lopsided fight,
however, and by June 2011, the regime
had killed about 1,300 people, including
children. (As of early 2014, estimates
put the total killed at more than 150,000,
but that is likely too low.)
In early 2010, about a year before the
maelstrom began in Syria, I
recommended that the President
nominate Robert Ford, an experienced
diplomat who had served across the
Middle East, most recently in Iraq, as
the first U.S. Ambassador to Syria in
more than five years. It was not an easy
decision. The United States had
withdrawn our Ambassador to signal
displeasure with the Syrian regime, and
returning one might be taken as an
endorsement of Assad. But I thought
then, and continue to believe now, that
we are generally better served by having
an Ambassador on the ground, even with
regimes we strongly oppose, to deliver
messages and serve as our eyes and
ears.
President Obama agreed with my
recommendation and nominated Robert
in February 2010. He was held up by the
Senate because of opposition, not to him
personally (his credentials were stellar)
but to the idea of sending an
Ambassador to Syria at all. Just after
Christmas the President used his
Constitutional authority to make
appointments during the Congressional
recess to put Robert in place. He arrived
in Damascus in January 2011, just in
time to get settled before the
demonstrations began. Protests escalated
in March, and security forces opened
fire and killed protesters in Daraa.
Assad deployed the Army. Government
forces laid siege to Daraa at the end of
April, deploying tanks and conducting
sweeps of houses.
The United States strongly condemned
all violence against civilians. As a result
Ambassador Ford and our embassy team
faced harassment and threats, including
one serious incident in July 2011, when
pro-government protesters breached the
embassy compound, smashed windows,
sprayed graffiti, and attacked Robert’s
residence.
Despite the danger, he went to Hama,
the scene of an infamous 1982 massacre,
to meet with protesters and express
American solidarity and sympathy with
those calling for democratic reform. As
Robert drove into the city, residents
covered his car with flowers. He visited
a hospital where people injured by
Syrian security forces were being
treated, and he tried to learn more about
the protesters, what their objectives
were and how to establish ongoing
contact with them. That visit established
Robert’s status as our lead in working
with the opposition. Many of the same
Senators who had blocked his
confirmation were so impressed with his
courage and intelligence that they voted
to confirm him in early October. This
was another example of an experienced
diplomat taking risks to get out from
behind the embassy’s walls to do the job
right.
Despite an international outcry over
the violence in Syria, Russia and China
vetoed a modest resolution at the UN
Security Council in October 2011 that
would have condemned Assad’s human
rights abuses and demanded that
peaceful protests be allowed to proceed.
Russia had long-standing political ties
with Syria, dating back to the Cold War,
including an important naval base on
Syria’s Mediterranean coast, and there
were religious ties between Syria’s
Orthodox Christians and the Russian
Orthodox Church. Russia was
determined to retain its influence and
steadfastly backed the Assad regime.
Bashar al-Assad is the son of Hafez
al-Assad, who seized control of Syria in
1970 and served as its leader for thirty
years until his death in June 2000. A
trained ophthalmologist, Bashar was
groomed as his father’s successor only
after his older brother’s death in a car
accident in 1994, and he assumed the
presidency following his father’s death.
Bashar’s wife, Asma, had a career in
investment banking before becoming
First Lady. A 2005 profile of the couple
said, “They seemed the essence of
secular Western-Arab fusion.” But, as
the article noted, this image was a
“mirage,” as the high hopes for the new
Syrian ruler turned into “a pattern of
empty promises, nasty oratory and
bloody tactics.” As unrest spread across
the Middle East, it was these “empty
promises” and unrealized hopes that
motivated many of the protests of the
Syrian people.
Assad and his ruling clique were
Alawites, a Shiite sect closely aligned
with Iran that had ruled over the Sunni
majority in Syria for decades, going
back to the French mandate after World
War I. Alawites made up 12 percent of
the country. The rebels were
predominantly Sunnis, who constituted
more than 70 percent of the population,
while the Kurds made up 9 percent.
Another 10 percent of Syrians are
Christians, and approximately 3 percent
are Druze, a sect originating from Shiite
Islam with elements of Christianity,
Judaism, and other beliefs. As the crisis
unfolded, one of the biggest challenges
we faced was helping the opposition
unite across the country’s many
religious, geographic, and ideological
lines.
In October 2011, the Arab League
demanded a cease-fire in Syria and
called on the Assad regime to pull its
troops back from the major cities,
release political prisoners, protect
access for journalists and humanitarian
workers, and begin a dialogue with the
protesters. Most predominantly Sunni
Arab countries, especially Saudi Arabia
and the other Gulf states, backed the
rebels and wanted Assad gone. Under
pressure from his neighbors, Assad
nominally agreed to the Arab League
plan, but then almost immediately
disregarded it. Regime forces continued
killing protesters in the following days.
In response the Arab League suspended
Syria’s membership.
In December, the Arab League tried
again. As before, Assad agreed to their
plan. This time, though, Arab monitors
were sent to Syria’s battle-scarred
cities. Unfortunately even the presence
of this international monitoring team did
little to calm the violence, and once
again it quickly became clear that Assad
had no intention of keeping his word. In
late January 2012, the Arab League
pulled the observers out in frustration
and asked the UN Security Council to
back its call for a political transition in
Syria that would require Assad to hand
over power to a Vice President and
establish a government of national unity.
By this point the regime’s Army was
using tanks to shell residential suburbs
of Damascus. The rebels’ determination
to resist at all costs was hardening; some
were becoming radicalized, and
extremists were joining the fight.
Jihadist groups, including some with ties
to al Qaeda, began trying to exploit the
conflict to advance their own agendas.
Refugees were fleeing across Syria’s
borders in large numbers into Jordan,
Turkey, and Lebanon. (As of 2014, there
were more than 2.5 million refugees
from the Syrian conflict.)
At the end of January 2012, I attended
a special session of the Security Council
in New York to hear the Arab League’s
report and debate how to respond. “We
all have a choice,” I told the Council.
“Stand with the people of Syria and the
region or become complicit in the
continuing violence there.”
A new resolution supporting the Arab
League’s peace plan ran into the same
trouble as previous attempts. The
Russians were implacably opposed to
anything that might constitute pressure on
Assad. The year before, they had
abstained in the vote to authorize a nofly zone over Libya and to take “all
necessary measures” to protect civilians
and then chafed as the NATO-led
mission to protect civilians accelerated
the fall of Qaddafi. Now, with Syria in
chaos, they were determined to prevent
another Western intervention. Assad’s
regime was too strategically important to
them. Libya was “a false analogy,” I
argued in New York. The resolution did
not impose sanctions or support the use
of military force, focusing instead on the
need for a peaceful political transition.
Still the Russians weren’t having any of
it.
I spoke with Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov from my plane on the
way to the Munich Security Conference
and then met there with him in person. I
told him we needed a unified message
from the international community.
Moscow wanted the resolution to be
tougher on the rebels than on the regime.
Lavrov pressed me on what would
happen when Assad refused to comply.
Would the next step be a Libya-style
intervention? No, I responded. The plan
was to use this resolution to pressure
Assad to negotiate. “He’ll only get the
message when the Security Council
speaks with one voice. We have gone
very far in clarifying this isn’t a Libya
scenario. There is not any kind of
authorization for force or intervention or
military action.”
The Russian rhetoric about upholding
sovereignty and opposing foreign
intervention rang particularly hollow
given their track record elsewhere. In
2008 and 2014, Putin did not hesitate to
send troops into Georgia and Ukraine,
violating the sovereignty of those
countries, simply because it suited his
interests.
As Lavrov and I talked in Munich,
there was a surge in violence in Syria.
Regime forces targeted Homs, the
country’s third largest city and a cradle
of the rebellion, with a barrage of
shelling that killed hundreds. It was the
bloodiest day in the conflict thus far.
I told Lavrov that every word in the
resolution in New York had been
thoroughly debated. We had made
concessions, while keeping the minimum
of what we hoped would end the
violence and begin a transition. Now it
was time to vote. The resolution would
be called to the floor that day.
“But what is the endgame?” Lavrov
asked. Sitting there in Munich, I could
not predict every step to come, and I
knew it would be a mistake to minimize
the challenges Syrians would face after
Assad. But I was sure about one thing: if
we did not begin a peace process, the
endgame would be grim indeed. There
would be more bloodshed, hardening
defiance from those whose families
were being brutalized and whose homes
were being bombed, and a greater
likelihood that a full-blown civil war
would attract extremists, possibly
resulting in a failed state, with different
areas of the country controlled by
warring factions, including terrorist
groups. Every additional day of
repression and violence made it more
difficult for Syrians to reconcile and
rebuild and increased the risk of
instability and sectarian conflict
spreading from Syria across the region.
A few hours after my meeting with
Lavrov, the Security Council convened
and called for a vote. I went before the
press corps in Munich, saying, “Are we
for peace and security and a democratic
future, or are we going to be complicit in
the continuing violence and bloodshed? I
know where the United States stands,
and we will soon find out where every
other member of the Security Council
stands.” Even after the bloodiest day yet
in Syria, Russia and China used their
veto power to prevent the world from
condemning the violence. To block this
resolution was to bear responsibility for
the horrors on the ground. It was, as I
said later, despicable.
As predicted, the situation kept getting
worse. The UN and the Arab League
named Kofi Annan as their Joint Special
Envoy on Syria at the end of February.
His mandate was to convince the regime,
the rebels, and their respective foreign
backers to agree on a political resolution
to the conflict.
To support this new diplomatic track,
I helped pull together a meeting of likeminded countries to consider other
avenues for increasing pressure on the
regime and providing humanitarian
assistance to suffering civilians, since
our first choice was blocked at the UN.
We supported diplomacy, but we
weren’t going to just wait for it. The
roster of those who felt equally
compelled to act kept swelling, and we
ultimately had more than sixty nations
come together in Tunisia at the end of
February for what became known as the
Friends of the Syrian People. We formed
a sanctions working group to cut off
Assad’s access to funds (although the
Russians and Iranians were quite
effective in replenishing his coffers),
pledged to send emergency supplies to
refugees fleeing the violence, and
increased training of Syrian civilian
opposition leaders.
Behind the scenes there was a lot of
talk in Tunis about funneling weapons to
the rebels to begin evening the odds
against the regime’s Army and its Iranian
and Russian backers. Our partners in the
Gulf were watching Sunni rebels and
civilians being slaughtered live on Al
Jazeera, and they were increasingly
impatient. Saudi Foreign Minister Prince
Saud al-Faisal said he thought supplying
weapons was “an excellent idea.” I
understood his frustration at how things
were going and the desire to shift the
military balance on the ground. But there
were also reasons to be wary of further
militarizing the situation and
accelerating the spiral to full-scale civil
war. Once guns went into the country,
they would be hard to control and could
easily fall into the hands of extremists.
Assad’s backers had no such worries.
Iranian forces from the Revolutionary
Guard and its elite paramilitary unit, the
Quds Force, were already in Syria
supporting Assad and the Syrian
military. The Iranians were playing a
key advisory role, accompanying Syrian
forces to the field and helping the regime
organize its own paramilitary forces.
Militants from Hezbollah, Iran’s proxies
in Lebanon, also joined the fight on
behalf of the Syrian regime. The
combined Iranian-Hezbollah presence
was critical to the regime’s grasp on
power.
I asked Prince Saud if he thought
Assad would cooperate with a plan to
end the violence and commence a
political transition, if we could convince
the Russians to agree on one. He did not
think so, he said, because Assad’s
family would never permit him. Led by
his mother, he was under constant
pressure to uphold his family’s position
and follow his father’s brutal example of
how to suppress an uprising. That was a
reference to when Hafez al-Assad
infamously destroyed the city of Hama in
1982 in retaliation for another uprising.
In Riyadh, at the end of March, I met
with Prince Saud and King Abdullah and
participated in the first meeting of a new
strategic partnership between the United
States and all six Gulf countries. Much
of the focus was on the threat from Iran,
but we also discussed the need to do
more to support the rebels in Syria. Late
that night I flew to Istanbul, where I met
with representatives from Turkey, Saudi
Arabia, the UAE, and Qatar and heard
the same messages about the need to get
arms to the rebels.
I was in a difficult position. On the
one hand, the United States was not
prepared to join such efforts to arm the
rebels, but we also didn’t want to
splinter the anti-Assad coalition or lose
leverage with the Arab countries. “Some
will be able to do certain things, and
others will do other things,” I said
carefully in Riyadh. “So when we talk
about assistance, we are talking about a
broad range of assistance. Not every
country will do the same.” That was as
close as I could get to publicly
acknowledging what was a fait
accompli: Certain countries would
increase their efforts to funnel arms,
while others would focus on
humanitarian needs. (As of April 2014,
the United States had pledged more than
$1.7 billion in such assistance and is the
largest donor of aid for displaced
Syrians.)
March 2012 marked the one-year
anniversary of the uprising in Syria, and
the UN estimated that the death toll by
then stood at more than eight thousand.
Kofi Annan was methodically meeting
with all the players, including Assad
himself, trying to thread the diplomatic
needle and end the conflict before the
casualties mounted any higher. In the
middle of the month he unveiled a sixpoint plan. It was similar to what the
Arab League had tried earlier in the
year. Kofi called on the Assad regime to
pull back its military forces and silence
their heavy weapons, allow peaceful
demonstrations and access to Syria for
humanitarian aid and journalists, and
begin a political transition that
addressed the legitimate aspirations and
concerns of the Syrian people. In an
effort to win Russian agreement, he
proposed that the UN Security Council
ratify his plan in a less weighty
“statement” rather than a full resolution.
That helped reassure Moscow that it
would not be used as a legal basis for
military intervention later on. The
Western powers went along because it
meant finally getting the Security
Council on record. In the statement the
Council called for a cease-fire and
directed Kofi to “facilitate a Syrian-led
political transition to a democratic,
plural political system . . . including
through commencing a comprehensive
political dialogue between the Syrian
government and the whole spectrum of
the Syrian opposition.”
Now that it had gotten on board with
the statement, Russia leaned on Assad to
accept Kofi’s terms, which he did at the
end of March. We had seen how much
his word meant, so no one was counting
on a cease-fire actually taking hold. As
the April 10 deadline approached, the
violence showed no signs of slowing.
Syrian military forces even fired into
Turkey and Lebanon, which raised the
specter of a wider regional conflict. But
then some measure of quiet did come.
The cease-fire was never full or
comprehensive, but there was a lull in
the fighting. Like the Arab League before
it, the UN dispatched teams of observers
to monitor conditions on the ground.
Again, however, despite his pledges,
Assad never took any credible steps to
implement the rest of Kofi’s plan, and
the fragile cease-fire soon began to
unravel. After about a month Kofi
reported “serious violations,” and in late
May there was a massacre of more than
a hundred villagers in Houla, half of
them children. Russia and China
continued to prevent the Security
Council from compelling compliance
with the six-point plan or attaching any
consequences for violations. It now
looked as if their earlier assent had been
little more than posturing intended to
ease international condemnation.
I began encouraging Kofi to take
another tack. Perhaps he should organize
an international conference to focus on
transition planning. Without further
diplomatic progress, the tattered ceasefire would collapse completely, and
we’d be left back at square one. In the
first weeks of June, Kofi visited me in
Washington, and we spoke often by
phone as he shuttled between Moscow,
Tehran, Damascus, and other capitals in
the region. He agreed that it was time to
take the next diplomatic steps and began
formulating plans for a summit at the end
of June.
In mid-June, increasing violence
forced the UN to suspend its observer
patrols. I accompanied President Obama
to the G-20 meeting in Los Cabos,
Mexico, where we sat down with
Russian President Putin for about two
hours. Syria was the principal topic of
discussion.
President Obama outlined our
position: Either the international
community could sit on the sidelines and
watch Syria be torn apart by civil and
proxy warfare, with all the resulting
negative consequences for regional
stability, or Russia could use its
influence to encourage a viable political
solution. Putin claimed that he had no
particular love for Assad, who was
causing Moscow quite a headache, and
he also professed to have no real
leverage with Damascus. I think he
personally identified with the challenges
Assad faced from internal opposition,
and he warned about the growing threat
from extremists among the opposition
and pointed to how messy transitions
had become in Libya, Egypt, and, of
course, Iraq.
These were all convenient
rationalizations for blocking action
while continuing to supply Assad with
money and arms. Even though I did not
trust Russia’s actions or words, I knew
we had no alternative but to exhaust
every diplomatic option. “Go back to the
Russians and say your team is going to
lay down a transition plan, and Russia
can be part of the discussion or left on
the sidelines,” I advised Kofi after the
Putin meeting. As the date of his
proposed conference in Geneva
approached, I worked closely with Kofi
to develop specific language that we
hoped might be able to gain consensus.
In a curtain-raising opinion piece in the
Washington Post, he made his
expectations clear. He wanted Syria’s
neighbors and the world’s great powers
to “commit to act in unison to end the
bloodshed and implement the six-point
plan, avoiding further militarization of
the conflict.” He added, “I expect all
who attend Saturday’s meeting to agree
that a Syrian-led transition process must
be achieved in accordance with clear
principles and guidelines.”
On the day before the start of the
summit, I urged Kofi to stand by the
principles he was proposing: “I
understand the tweak here, the
clarification there. I can live with that.
But the core idea that has to come out of
the meeting is that the international
community, including Russia and China,
are united behind a political transition
that would go to a democratic future.
That’s sacrosanct. The details can be
batted around but we have to keep that
core.” Kofi thought that, in the end, the
Russians would get on board. “They
said change can come but it must be
orderly,” he told me. I was not as
optimistic, but agreed we had to test.

I arrived in Geneva shortly after 1:00 in
the morning of June 30 after a flight from
Russia, where I had attended an
economic conference of Asian-Pacific
nations. Over a long dinner in St.
Petersburg, I had pressed Lavrov on the
need to support Kofi’s efforts and bring
the conflict to an end. I knew the
Russians would never be comfortable
explicitly calling for Assad to leave
office, but, with our help, Kofi had
crafted an elegant solution. He was
proposing the establishment of a
transitional unity government exercising
full executive power, which would be
broadly inclusive but exclude “those
whose continued presence and
participation would undermine the
credibility of the transition and
jeopardize stability and reconciliation.”
That was code for excluding Assad. The
Russians wanted words that papered
over the difference between us (Assad
must go) and them (we’re not going to
force him to go) and leave it up to the
Syrians to sort out.
Lavrov took a hard line. He claimed
Russia wanted a political resolution, but
he wouldn’t agree to anything that might
make that possible. I pointed out that if
we failed to reach an agreement the next
day in Geneva based on Kofi’s proposal
for an orderly transition, the UN-led
diplomatic effort would collapse,
extremists would gain ground, and the
conflict would escalate. The Arabs and
the Iranians would pour in even more
weapons. Sectarian tensions and a
growing flood of refugees would further
destabilize Syria’s neighbors, especially
Lebanon and Jordan. I still believed the
Assad regime would eventually fall, but
it would take much more of the Syrian
state and the region with it. Such a
scenario wouldn’t serve Russia’s
interests or preserve its influence. But
Lavrov wouldn’t budge. Boarding my
plane to Switzerland, I knew we’d have
to continue pressing the Russians and
working to get everyone else on board
with a text.
In Geneva I met first with British
Foreign Secretary William Hague and
French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius
to take stock of what we wanted to
achieve at the conference. Hague and I
then talked with Hamad bin Jassim of
Qatar, and Turkish Foreign Minister
Davutoğlu, who pushed us to consider
supporting the rebels with military aid
regardless of the outcome in Geneva.
They knew the United States and Britain
were not prepared to do that but wanted
to be heard nonetheless.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
presided over the opening session of the
meeting of what he called
(optimistically) the Action Group on
Syria with Foreign Ministers from the
five permanent members of the Security
Council, along with Turkey, Iraq,
Kuwait, Qatar, and the European Union.
Neither Iran nor Saudi Arabia was
invited.
At the start of the meeting, Kofi
outlined his goals: “We are here to agree
on guidelines and principles for a
Syrian-led political transition that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. And we are here to agree on
actions that each and every one of us
must take to turn these objectives into
reality on the ground, including
consequences for non-compliance.” He
presented a document that would
enshrine the transition he was proposing.
I welcomed Kofi’s plan to pave the
way for a democratic transition and “a
post-Assad future.” The United States
shared his goal of a democratic,
pluralistic Syria that would uphold the
rule of law and respect the universal
rights of all its people and every group,
regardless of ethnicity, sect, or gender.
We also agreed that it was important to
maintain the integrity of the Syrian state
and its institutions, particularly enough
of the security infrastructure to prevent
the kind of chaos we had seen in Iraq
after the fall of Saddam Hussein and the
disbanding of the Iraqi Army and
government. For a new agreement
actually to be implemented, I said, it
would need a UN Security Council
resolution “imposing real and immediate
consequences for non-compliance.” In
addition nations with influence on the
warring parties would have to pressure
them to accept and support the transition.
That meant that Russia should use its
clout with the regime, while the Arabs
and the West would do the same with the
rebels to get them all on board.
We preferred stronger language than
what Kofi was suggesting on certain
points (for example, we would have
liked a more direct reference to Assad’s
departure), but, in the interest of
simplicity and consensus, we agreed to
accept the document as it was written,
and we urged all other nations to follow
suit.
The public portion of international
meetings like this is typically scripted.
Each country and organization states its
position, and it can be rather boring. The
action generally starts when the cameras
leave. That’s what happened here.
We left the ceremonial hall and
crowded into a long rectangular room
with Kofi and Ban Ki-moon at the head
and the Ministers, each with a single
aide, arranged on each side of two
facing tables. Emotions ran high; at one
point Ministers were shouting at one
another and even pounding the table.
Eventually the commotion settled into a
running argument between me and
Lavrov. That’s where this had always
been headed.
Eventually it seemed as if the
Russians might accept a transitional
governing body, if we could get the
language right. Lavrov balked at Kofi’s
phrase excluding those who would
“undermine the credibility of the
transition and jeopardize stability and
reconciliation.” I offered a new
formulation to break the deadlock. The
transitional governing body would
include members of both the government
and the opposition chosen “on the basis
of mutual consent.” Finally the Russians
agreed.
It’s easy to get lost in the semantics,
but words constitute much of a
diplomat’s work, and I knew they would
shape how the rest of the world received
our agreement and how it was
understood on the ground in Syria. I
offered “mutual consent” as a way out
because, in practice, there was no way
Assad would pass such a test; the
opposition would never consent to him.
We retained the phrase “full executive
powers” to describe the mandate for the
proposed transitional governing body;
that meant Assad and his cronies would
be stripped of their authority. To
strengthen our case, I made sure the
agreement explicitly put the Syrian
security and intelligence services, along
with “all governmental institutions,”
under the control of the transitional
governing body and called for “top
leadership that inspires public
confidence” (another standard Assad
would never meet).
I insisted that we should go next to the
Security Council and pass what’s called
a Chapter VII resolution, which would
authorize tough sanctions in the event of
noncompliance. Lavrov was
noncommittal on that, but he agreed to
use Russia’s influence to support Kofi
and his plan and joined all of us in
signing on the dotted line of what we had
negotiated. Then we all went out to
explain it to the world.
Trouble started almost right away.
The press missed the intent and plain
meaning of “mutual consent” and read it
as an admission that Assad could stay in
power. The New York Times filed a
gloomy report under the headline “Talks
Come Up with Plan for Syria, but Not
for Assad’s Exit.” Lavrov did his best to
fuel this interpretation. “There is no
attempt to impose any kind of a
transition process,” he told the press.
“There are no prior conditions to the
transfer process and no attempt to
exclude any group from the process.”
That was technically true but blatantly
misleading.
Kofi dismissed Lavrov’s spin. “I will
doubt that the Syrians—who have fought
so hard for their independence, to be
able to say how they’re governed and
who governs them—will select people
with blood on their hands to lead them,”
he said. I backed him up: “What we have
done here is to strip away the fiction that
[Assad] and those with blood on their
hands can stay in power. The plan calls
for the Assad regime to give way to a
new transitional governing body that
will have full governance powers.”
Over time the opposition and civilians in
Syria came to see the Geneva
Communiqué for what it was: a blueprint
for Assad’s departure.

It was a bad summer for Syria. After
signing the agreement in Geneva, the
Russians ultimately refused to back the
Chapter VII resolution at the UN or exert
any real leverage with Assad. Although
disappointing, their behavior was hardly
surprising.
In August, Kofi resigned in disgust. “I
did my best and sometimes the best is
not always good enough,” he told me. “I
don’t know what else you could’ve
done, given the intransigence of the
Russians on the Security Council,” I
replied. And I told him, “I can’t imagine
how we could’ve done any more than
what we did. At least in Geneva we had
a framework, but they were just
immovable.” Meanwhile the casualties
in Syria climbed into the tens of
thousands, and the crisis spun further out
of control.
I was growing increasingly frustrated
but kept at it. When we ran into the
Russian-made brick wall at the UN, I
kept pressing forward along non-UN
tracks, holding more meetings of the
Friends of the Syrian People, which by
now had expanded to about a hundred
nations. The challenge was to convince
all the parties—Assad and his Russian
and Iranian backers on the one side, the
rebels and the Arab states on the other—
that a final decisive military victory was
impossible and they should focus on
reaching a diplomatic solution. That was
going to take a great deal of carefully
and consistently applied pressure. The
United States and our partners steadily
ratcheted up sanctions on the Assad
regime. We froze their assets, imposed
travel bans, and restricted trade. The
Syrian economy was in free-fall. But
with Russia and Iran bankrolling
Assad’s war effort, the fighting
continued unabated.
Assad kept escalating the use of air
power and began firing Scud missiles to
overwhelm the rebels, which killed even
more civilians. The opposition, despite
efforts by the Europeans, Arabs, and the
United States, remained in disarray. We
provided rebels with “nonlethal” aid,
including communications gear and
rations, starting in March 2012, but we
held the line against contributing arms
and training. There were many voices,
particularly among the Syrian
opposition, crying out for us to support
them as we had supported the Libyan
rebels. But Syria was not Libya.
The Assad regime was much more
entrenched than Qaddafi, with more
support among key segments of the
population, more allies in the region, a
real Army, and far more robust air
defenses. Unlike in Libya, where the
rebel Transitional National Council had
controlled large swaths of territory in
the east, including Benghazi, the
country’s second largest city, the
opposition in Syria was disorganized
and diffuse. It struggled to hold territory
and to coalesce around a single
command structure. And, of course, there
was one other crucial difference: Russia
was blocking any move at the UN on
Syria, in large measure to prevent a
replay of Libya.
In the early days of the fighting many
had assumed Assad’s fall was
inevitable. After all, the previous
leaders of Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and
Yemen were all gone. It was hard to
imagine that, after so much bloodshed
and getting a taste of freedom, the Syrian
people would just settle down and agree
to accept dictatorial rule once again. But
now, in the second year of civil war, it
seemed increasingly possible that Assad
would hang on, even if it meant tearing
the country apart and fomenting
destructive sectarian strife. Syria could
be doomed to a long and bloody
stalemate. Or it could become a failed
state, with the structure of government
collapsing and chaos ensuing. And the
longer the conflict dragged on, the more
danger there was that the instability
would destabilize vulnerable neighbors,
like Jordan and Lebanon, and the more
likely it was that extremists would build
support inside Syria.
I started referring to Syria as a
“wicked problem,” a term used by
planning experts to describe particularly
complex challenges that confound
standard solutions and approaches.
Wicked problems rarely have a right
answer; in fact, part of what makes them
wicked is that every option appears
worse than the next. Increasingly that’s
how Syria appeared. Do nothing, and a
humanitarian disaster envelops the
region. Intervene militarily, and risk
opening Pandora’s box and wading into
another quagmire, like Iraq. Send aid to
the rebels, and watch it end up in the
hands of extremists. Continue with
diplomacy, and run head-first into a
Russian veto. None of these approaches
offered much hope of success. But we
had to keep at it.
As it became clear that the Geneva
effort was stalemated, I and others on the
Obama national security team began
exploring what it would take to stand up
a carefully vetted and trained force of
moderate Syrian rebels who could be
trusted with American weapons. There
are real risks to such an approach. In the
1980s, the United States, Saudi Arabia,
and Pakistan armed Afghan rebels called
mujahideen who helped end the Soviet
occupation of their country. Some of
those fighters, including Osama bin
Laden, went on to form al Qaeda and
turned their sights on targets in the West.
Nobody wanted a repeat of that
scenario.
But if rebels could be vetted and
trained effectively, it would be helpful
in a number of ways. First, even a
relatively small group might be able to
give a big psychological boost to the
opposition and convince Assad’s
backers to consider a political solution.
Hezbollah gave credence to this view on
the other side, when they helped shift the
war in Assad’s favor by deploying only
a few thousand hard-core fighters.
Second, and more immediately, our
action—or inaction—had consequences
for our relationships with our regional
partners. It wasn’t a secret that various
Arab states and individuals were
sending arms into Syria. But the flow of
weapons was poorly coordinated, with
different countries sponsoring different
and sometimes competing armed groups.
And a troubling amount of matériel was
finding its way to extremists. Because
the United States was not part of this
effort, we had less leverage to corral
and coordinate the arms traffic. I had
heard this firsthand in difficult
conversations around the Gulf. If,
however, America was willing finally to
get in the game, we could be much more
effective in isolating the extremists and
empowering the moderates inside Syria.
One of the prime worries about Syria
—and one of the reasons it was a
wicked problem—was the lack of any
viable alternatives to Assad on the
ground. He and his allies could
plausibly argue, like Louis XV of
France, “Après moi, le déluge.” (After
Assad, chaos.) The power vacuum in
Iraq after the fall of Saddam and the
disbanding of the Iraqi Army offered a
cautionary tale. But if the United States
could train and equip a reliable and
effective moderate rebel force, it could
help hold the country together during a
transition, safeguard chemical weapons
stockpiles, and prevent ethnic cleansing
and score settling.
But could it be done? The key would
be thoroughly vetting the rebel fighters to
ensure we first weeded out the
extremists and then maintained close
intelligence sharing and operational
coordination with all our partners.
In Iraq and Afghanistan the United
States spent considerable energy training
local soldiers, trying to mold them into a
cohesive national army capable of
providing security and defeating
insurgencies. General David Petraeus,
who commanded the U.S. military effort
in both countries before becoming
Director of the Central Intelligence
Agency in 2011, knew firsthand how
hard this could be. Despite some
successes, the Iraqi and Afghan security
forces were still struggling to find their
footing. But through his experience in
those countries, Petraeus had learned a
lot about what worked and what didn’t.
I invited Petraeus to my house in
Washington for lunch on a Saturday
afternoon in July to discuss whether it
was possible to vet, train, and equip
moderate opposition fighters. If he
thought this kind of effort could be
accomplished in Syria, that would mean
a lot. He had already given careful
thought to the idea, and had even started
sketching out the specifics and was
preparing to present a plan.
Our military’s top brass, reluctant to
get involved in Syria, consistently
offered dire projections of the forces
that would be required to overcome
Assad’s advanced air defenses and
conduct a Libya-style no-fly zone. But
Secretary of Defense Panetta had
become as frustrated as I was with the
lack of options in Syria; he knew from
his own time leading the CIA what our
intelligence operatives could do.
In mid-August, I headed to Istanbul to
consult with President Abdullah Gül,
Prime Minister Erdoğan, and Foreign
Minister Davutoğlu. Turkey was deeply
troubled by what was happening across
its border and trying to cope with the
massive influx of refugees from Syria,
some of whom I met while there, as well
as periodic incidents of cross-border
violence, including Syria’s shooting
down a Turkish fighter jet over the
Mediterranean. The loss of that plane
was a dramatic reminder that this crisis
could explode into a regional conflict at
any moment. In my meetings I affirmed
that the United States and the rest of our
NATO allies were committed to
Turkey’s security against Syrian
aggression.
Although there had been continuous
consultations between us and the Turks
since the conflict started, I thought we
should intensify operational planning by
our militaries in order to prepare
contingency plans. What would it take to
impose a no-fly zone? How would we
respond to the use or loss of chemical
weapons? How could we better
coordinate support for the armed
opposition? The Turks agreed, and two
days later Davutoğlu and I got on the
phone to discuss our thinking with the
Foreign Ministers of Great Britain,
France, and Germany.
I returned to Washington reasonably
confident that if we decided to begin
arming and training moderate Syrian
rebels, we could put in place effective
coordination with our regional partners.
By now interagency planning was in high
gear, and Petraeus presented the plan to
the President. He listened carefully and
had a lot of questions. He worried that
arming the rebels was not likely to be
enough to drive Assad from power and
that with all the weapons already
flowing into the country from Arab
nations, our contributions would hardly
be decisive. And there were always
unintended consequences to consider.
The story of the mujahideen in
Afghanistan remained a powerful
cautionary tale never far from anyone’s
mind. The President asked for examples
of instances when the United States had
backed an insurgency that could be
considered a success.
These were very reasonable concerns,
but Petraeus and I argued that there was
a big difference between Qatar and
Saudi Arabia dumping weapons into the
country and the United States
responsibly training and equipping a
nonextremist rebel force. And getting
control of that mess was a big part of our
plan’s rationale. What’s more, the goal
was not to build up a force strong
enough to defeat the regime. Rather the
idea was to give us a partner on the
ground we could work with that could
do enough to convince Assad and his
backers that a military victory was
impossible. It wasn’t a perfect plan, by
any means. In fact, the best I could say
for it was that it was the least bad option
among many even worse alternatives.
Despite high-level support from the
National Security Council, some in the
White House were skeptical. After all,
the President had been elected in large
part because of his opposition to the war
in Iraq and his promise to bring the
troops home. Getting entangled in any
way in another sectarian civil war in the
Middle East was not what he had in
mind when coming into office. And the
President thought we needed more time
to evaluate the Syrian opposition before
escalating our commitment.
The risks of both action and inaction
were high. Both choices would bring
unintended consequences. The
President’s inclination was to stay the
present course and not take the
significant further step of arming rebels.
No one likes to lose a debate,
including me. But this was the
President’s call and I respected his
deliberations and decision. From the
beginning of our partnership, he had
promised me that I would always get a
fair hearing. And I always did. In this
case, my position didn’t prevail.
With the plan to arm the rebels dead
in the water, I threw myself back into the
diplomatic push, trying to further isolate
and pressure the regime while
addressing the humanitarian catastrophe.
In August 2012, UN Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon had appointed Lakhdar
Brahimi, an experienced diplomat from
Algeria, to succeed Kofi Annan. He and
I met and talked often, right up until my
tenure ended. At a meeting of the Friends
of the Syrian People in September, I
announced additional aid to help get
food, water, blankets, and critical
medical services to people suffering in
Syria. I also pledged increased support
for civilian opposition groups, including
satellite-linked computers, telephones,
cameras, and training for more than a
thousand activists, students, and
independent journalists. As more parts
of Syria slipped free from the regime’s
control, we would also help local
opposition groups provide essential
services, such as reopening schools and
rebuilding homes. But all of these steps
were Band-Aids. The conflict would
rage on.

By the time I departed the State
Department in early 2013, tens of
thousands of Syrians had been killed.
Millions more had fled. International
diplomacy had reached a standstill. Our
fears were being realized as extremists
were eclipsing the more moderate
leaders of the Free Syrian Army.
In March 2013, little more than a
month after I left office, troubling reports
started coming in from around Aleppo
that the Assad regime had begun using
chemical weapons for the first time. This
had been a major concern for two years.
Syria was believed to maintain some of
the biggest stockpiles of mustard gas,
sarin, and other chemical weapons in the
world. Throughout 2012, we had
received sporadic reports that regime
forces were moving or mixing chemical
agents. In response both President
Obama and I issued stark warnings. In
August 2012, President Obama said that
moving or using chemical weapons was
a red line for the United States. The
clear implication was that if the regime
crossed that line, actions, potentially
including military force, would be taken.
In 2012, that threat seemed to be an
effective deterrent, and Assad backed
down. So if these new reports about
chemical weapons were true, the
conflict in Syria had just taken a very
dangerous turn.
The President again said that the use
of chemical weapons would be a game
changer, but U.S. intelligence agencies
were not yet ready to say with any
certainty that an attack had actually
happened. More investigation was
needed. In June 2013, in a low-key
statement, the White House confirmed
that it finally felt confident that chemical
weapons had indeed been used on a
small scale on multiple occasions,
killing up to 150 people. The President
decided to increase aid to the Free
Syrian Army. On background,
administration officials told the press
they would begin supplying arms and
ammunition for the first time, reversing
the President’s decision the previous
summer.
Then, in August 2013, the world was
shocked by images of a massive new
chemical attack in opposition
neighborhoods around Damascus. The
reported death toll would climb to more
than 1,400 men, women, and children.
This was a major escalation and a
blatant violation of both the President’s
red line and long-standing international
norms. Pressure began building
immediately for a robust response from
the United States. Secretary of State
Kerry took the lead in condemning the
attack, calling it a “moral obscenity.”
President Obama said, “We cannot
accept a world where women and
children and innocent civilians are
gassed on a terrible scale.” Americans
wondered whether military action was
imminent.
Some commentators and members of
Congress asked why the President cared
so much about chemical weapons when
Assad had been killing so many people
with conventional weapons. Chemical
weapons are in a category by
themselves. They have been banned by
the international community since the
1925 Geneva Protocol and 1993
Chemical Weapons Convention because
they are gruesome, indiscriminate, and
inhumane. As President Obama
explained, “If we fail to act, the Assad
regime will see no reason to stop using
chemical weapons. As the ban against
these weapons erodes, other tyrants will
have no reason to think twice about
acquiring poison gas, and using them.
Over time, our troops would again face
the prospect of chemical warfare on the
battlefield. And it could be easier for
terrorist organizations to obtain these
weapons, and to use them to attack
civilians.”
As the White House geared up for
action, Prime Minister David Cameron
lost a vote in the British Parliament to
authorize the use of force in Syria. Two
days later President Obama announced
his intent to order air strikes to deter and
degrade future use of chemical weapons
by the Assad regime. But in a move that
surprised many in Washington, the
President said he would seek
authorization from Congress, which was
in recess, before acting. Suddenly
Congress was plunged into a fierce
debate about what to do. Parallels were
drawn with the run-up to the war in Iraq.
Worst-case scenarios and slippery
slopes were invoked. The President’s
plan for a limited strike to uphold a
crucial global norm seemed to get lost in
the bluster. As the days went by, the tide
of public opinion began to turn against
the White House. Vote counters in
Congress began predicting that the
President might lose, which would deal
a serious blow to U.S. prestige and
credibility. I watched the back-and-forth
with consternation. Syria had become
even more of a wicked problem. I
supported the President’s efforts with
Congress and urged lawmakers to act.
During this time, I spoke with
Secretary Kerry and White House Chief
of Staff Denis McDonough about ways
to strengthen the President’s hand
abroad, especially in advance of his trip
later that week to the G-20 summit in St.
Petersburg, where he’d see Vladimir
Putin. Not wanting Putin to be able to
hold the contentious Congressional
debate over the President, I suggested to
Denis that the White House find some
way to show bipartisan support ahead of
the vote. Knowing that Senator Bob
Corker, the leading Republican on the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
was no fan of Putin’s, my advice to
Denis was that he be enlisted to help
send a message. The idea was to use a
routine committee hearing that week to
hold a vote on the authorization to use
military force that the President would
win. Denis, always open to ideas and
very familiar with the ways of Congress
from his time serving on Capitol Hill,
agreed. Working with Corker, the White
House got the vote. While not the
world’s most significant statement, it
was enough to telegraph to Putin that we
were not as divided as he hoped. Denis
called back a few days later to see if I
had any other ideas, and said that the
President wanted to call me the next day.
Knowing how much he had on his plate,
I told Denis the President shouldn’t feel
it was necessary. But Denis said that
POTUS (the President of the United
States) was going to call, and we spoke
the next day about the state of play of his
Congressional efforts and other ongoing
developments on the international stage.
In a fortuitous coincidence, I was
scheduled to go to the White House in
person on September 9 for an event
about illegal wildlife trafficking. At the
State Department I had learned that
African forest elephants were nearing
extinction. While unfortunate on its own,
what caught my attention was one of the
reasons behind it: terrorists and armed
groups like Al Shabaab and the Lord’s
Resistance Army had entered the illegal
ivory trade as a means of funding their
illicit and destabilizing activities across
Central Africa. When I left government
and joined Bill and Chelsea at the
Clinton Foundation, Chelsea and I began
working with leading conservation
groups to organize a global response that
would “stop the killing, stop the
trafficking, and stop the demand.”
Thanks in part to our lobbying, the White
House also saw this as an important
issue, and President Obama signed an
executive order in the summer of 2013 to
step up antitrafficking efforts. Now the
White House was holding a conference
to plan next steps, and they wanted
Chelsea and me to be there. Of course,
all anyone in the rest of the world
wanted to hear about was Syria.
That morning, at a press conference in
London, Secretary Kerry was asked if
there was anything Assad could do to
prevent military action. “Sure,” Kerry
replied, “he could turn over every single
bit of his chemical weapons to the
international community in the next week
—turn it over, all of it without delay and
allow a full and total accounting for that.
But he isn’t about to do it and it can’t be
done.” Although Kerry’s answer may
have reflected conversations he was
having with allies and the Russians, it
sounded to the world like an offhand
remark. A State Department
spokesperson downplayed it as “a
rhetorical argument.” The Russians,
however, seized on Kerry’s comment
and embraced it as a serious diplomatic
offer.
When I arrived at the White House at
1 p.m., top administration officials were
debating how to respond. I was given a
briefing, and then I went into the Oval
Office to talk with the President. It was
strange being back in that familiar room
for the first time since I’d stepped down
seven months earlier, once again
discussing an urgent international crisis.
I told the President that if the votes for
action against Syria were not winnable
in Congress, he should make lemonade
out of lemons and welcome the
unexpected overture from Moscow.
There were reasons to be cautious, of
course. This latest diplomatic ploy by
the Russians could be just another
delaying tactic to keep Assad in power
at all costs. The large chemical weapons
supply wasn’t good for them either, with
its own restive Muslim population. But
the prospect of eliminating Assad’s
chemical weapons stockpile was worth
the risk, especially since the President
was facing a potentially damaging
standoff with Congress. This wouldn’t
end the civil war or do much to help
civilians caught in the crossfire, but it
would remove a serious threat to Syrian
civilians, neighbors including Israel, and
the United States itself. As the conflict
worsened and instability increased, so
too would the chances that these
chemical weapons would be used again
against Syrian civilians or transferred to
Hezbollah or stolen by other terrorists.
I told the President that I still believed
it was crucial to pursue a diplomatic
solution that would end the conflict. I
knew exactly how hard this would be.
After all, I had been trying since March
2011. But the road map we had signed in
Geneva the previous year still offered a
path forward. Maybe cooperation on
chemical weapons would create
momentum for broader progress. It was
unlikely, but worth testing.
The President agreed and asked me to
make a statement. Outside the Oval, I
huddled with Ben Rhodes, the
President’s Deputy National Security
Advisor and top foreign policy
speechwriter, scribbling new language
at the top of my remarks on ivory
trafficking. Like Denis McDonough,
Rhodes was one of the President’s aides
whom I had come to trust and value over
the years. He had also grown close with
members of my team, and they would
reminisce about how far we’d all come
since the bad old days of the 2008
primary campaign, and how they missed
working together. Now I was glad once
again to have his advice on how to send
just the right message to the world.
When I walked into the wildlife event
in the White House auditorium, it was
packed with more cameras and
journalists than had probably ever
reported on elephant poaching before. I
started with Syria: “If the regime
immediately surrendered its stockpiles
as was suggested by Secretary Kerry and
the Russians, that would be an important
step. But this cannot be another excuse
for delay or obstruction, and Russia has
to support the international community’s
efforts sincerely or be held to account.” I
also stressed that it was the President’s
threat to use force that spurred the
Russians to look for a way out.
The White House decided to put off
the vote in Congress to give diplomacy a
chance to work. Secretary Kerry flew to
Geneva and hammered out the details for
removing chemical weapons with
Lavrov. Just a month later, the UN
agency charged with implementing the
deal, the Organisation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize. It was quite a vote of
confidence. Remarkably, as of this
writing, the agreement has held, and the
UN is making slow but steady progress
dismantling Assad’s chemical weapons
arsenal, despite extraordinarily difficult
circumstances. There have been delays,
but more than 90 percent of Syria’s
chemical weapons had been removed by
late April 2014.
In January 2014 Special
Representative Brahimi convened a
second UN conference on Syria in
Geneva with the goal of implementing
the agreement I had negotiated back in
June 2012. For the first time
representatives from the Assad regime
sat down face-to-face with members of
the opposition. But talks failed to
produce any progress. The regime
refused to engage seriously on the
question of a transitional governing
body, as mandated by the original
agreement, and their Russian allies stood
faithfully behind them. Meanwhile the
fighting on the ground continued
unabated.
The humanitarian tragedy unfolding in
Syria is heartbreaking. As usual,
innocent women and children are
bearing the brunt of the suffering.
Extremists continue to gain ground, and
intelligence officials in the United States
and Europe warn that they could pose a
threat well beyond Syria. In February
2014, CIA Director John Brennan
reported, “We are concerned about the
use of Syrian territory by the Al Qaeda
organization to recruit individuals and
develop the capability to be able not just
to carry out attacks inside of Syria, but
also to use Syria as a launching pad.”
Director of National Intelligence James
Clapper put an even finer point on it,
saying that at least one extremist group
in Syria “does have aspirations for
attacks on the [American] homeland.”
With a bloody stalemate continuing in
Syria, this danger will only grow, and
the United States and our allies will not
be able to ignore it. More moderate
members of the Syrian opposition also
recognize the threat posed by the
extremists trying to hijack their
revolution, and some have launched
efforts to drive them out of rebel-held
territory. But that will be an uphill
battle, requiring a diversion of arms and
men away from the fight against Assad.
In April 2014, there were reports that
the United States would provide
additional training and arms to certain
rebel groups.
As Kofi Annan said at the first
Geneva summit, “History is a somber
judge.” It is impossible to watch the
suffering in Syria, including as a private
citizen, and not ask what more could
have been done. That’s part of what
makes Syria and the broader challenge
of an unstable Middle East such a
wicked problem. But wicked problems
can’t paralyze us. We need to keep
urgently seeking solutions, however hard
they are to find.
20

Gaza: Anatomy of a
Cease-fire

The motorcade pulled over to the side
of the dusty highway between Ramallah
and Jerusalem. Security agents
scrambled out of their armored vehicles
and peered down the road, back toward
the heart of the West Bank. Others
looked up at the sky. Israeli intelligence
had just shared reports that a rocket
might have been fired by Palestinian
extremists in the Gaza Strip. There was
no way to know for sure where it was
headed. American officials in the
motorcade who had been riding in a
standard-issue van quickly piled into
one of the several heavily armored cars
that provided better protection from a
blast. With everyone situated we were
back on the road, headed toward
Jerusalem.
In the days before Thanksgiving 2012,
the Holy Land once again felt like a war
zone. I left a high-level summit in Asia
and flew to the Middle East on an
emergency diplomatic mission to try to
stop an air war between Israel and
Hamas in Gaza from escalating into a
much more deadly ground war. To do
that I would have to broker a cease-fire
between implacable and distrustful
adversaries against the backdrop of a
region in turmoil. After four years of
frustrating diplomacy in the Middle East,
this would be a crucial test of America’s
leadership.

Nearly four years earlier, the Obama
Administration had come into office
mere days after the end of another
conflict in Gaza, one also precipitated
by rocket fire into Israel. In early
January 2009, the Israeli military
launched a ground invasion of Gaza to
stop rockets being launched by militants
across the border. After nearly two
weeks of brutal urban fighting that left
about 1,400 people dead in Gaza, Israel
pulled back and resumed a de facto
siege of the Palestinian enclave. For the
next few years, persistent but low-level
violence continued across the border.
More than one hundred rockets were
fired into southern Israel in both 2009
and 2010, as well as occasional mortar
attacks. In some cases Israeli jets would
retaliate with air strikes. This situation
was far from acceptable, but by the
standards of the region it was
considered a relatively quiet time. But
starting in 2011, as the extremists
rearmed and much of the Middle East
was swept by revolution, the violence
escalated. Hundreds of rockets hit Israel
that year. The pace accelerated in 2012.
On November 11, Israeli Defense
Minister Ehud Barak warned about
potential Israeli action against terrorist
factions in Gaza after more than a
hundred rockets hit southern Israel in a
twenty-four-hour period, injuring three
Israelis.
Since 2007, Gaza had been ruled by
Hamas, the extremist Palestinian group
founded in the late 1980s during the first
intifada and designated by the United
States as a foreign terrorist organization
in 1997. Its stated goal was not an
independent state in the Palestinian
territories, but the destruction of Israel
altogether and the establishment of an
Islamic emirate in the territory between
the Jordan River and the Mediterranean
Sea. For years it drew financial and
military support from Iran and Syria,
and, after the death of Yasser Arafat in
2004, it competed with the more
moderate Fatah Party of Mahmoud
Abbas for leadership of the Palestinian
cause. After winning legislative
elections in 2006, Hamas seized control
of the Gaza Strip from Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority in 2007, and it
held on to power despite the 2009 war.
Hamas and its foreign backers spent
their money on arms smuggling to
rebuild their stocks, while Gaza’s
economy continued to decline and its
people continued to suffer.
Then the upheaval of the Arab Spring
shook up the Middle East chessboard,
and Hamas found itself navigating a
changed landscape. In Syria, its
traditional patron, the Alawite dictator
Bashar al-Assad, engaged in a brutal
crackdown against the largely Sunni
population. Hamas, a Sunni organization,
abandoned its headquarters in
Damascus. At the same time, the Muslim
Brotherhood, a Sunni Islamist party with
ties to Hamas, rose to power in
postrevolutionary Egypt, across the
border from Gaza. For Hamas, it was
like one door opening just as another one
was closing. Complicating matters
further, Hamas faced growing
competition at home from other extremist
groups, in particular Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, equally intent on fighting Israel
but not burdened by any responsibility to
govern Gaza or deliver results to the
people.
With Israel enforcing a blockade of
Gaza by sea and keeping tight control of
its northern and eastern borders, the
main point of resupply for Hamas came
through the short southern border with
Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula. Under Mubarak
the Egyptians were reasonably strict
about smuggling and generally worked
well with Israel, although Hamas found
success digging tunnels beneath the
border and into Egyptian territory. After
Mubarak fell and the Muslim
Brotherhood rose to power in Egypt,
crossing the Gaza border became easier.
At the same time, Egyptian authorities
started to lose control of the Sinai
Peninsula. The 23,000-square-mile
desert region juts out into the Red Sea
from the eastern banks of the Suez Canal.
The Sinai is famous for its role in the
Bible and its strategic location as a land
bridge between Africa and Asia. It was
invaded by Israel twice, once in 1956
during the Suez Crisis and again in 1967
during the Six Day War. Under the terms
of the 1979 Camp David Accords, Israel
returned Sinai to Egypt, and an
international peacekeeping force
including U.S. troops arrived to maintain
the truce. Sinai is also home to nomadic
and restive Bedouin tribes long
marginalized by Cairo. These tribes took
advantage of the chaos triggered by the
Egyptian Revolution by asserting their
autonomy and demanding more
economic support from the government
and greater respect from government
security forces. As the Sinai descended
into lawlessness, extremists with links to
al Qaeda began to see it as a safe haven.
In one of my first meetings with the
new Egyptian President, Mohamed
Morsi, I asked, “What are you going to
do to prevent al Qaeda and other
extremists from destabilizing Egypt and,
in particular, the Sinai?” His response
was “Why would they do that? We have
an Islamist government now.” Expecting
solidarity from terrorists was either
quite naïve or shockingly sinister.
“Because you will never be pure
enough,” I explained. “I don’t care what
your positions are. They will come after
you. And you’ll have to protect your
country and your government.” He
would hear none of it.
By August 2012, the threat posed by
the situation in the Sinai was undeniable.
One Sunday evening, a group of some
thirty-five armed and masked militants
attacked an Egyptian Army outpost near
the border with Israel and killed sixteen
soldiers as they were sitting down to eat
dinner. The extremists then stole an
armored vehicle and a truck, loaded it
with explosives, and headed toward
Israel. The truck exploded as they
barreled through the border fence at the
Kerem Shalom crossing. Israeli air
strikes then destroyed the armored
vehicle. The confrontation lasted only
about fifteen minutes, but it badly shook
both Egypt and Israel. After the tragedy,
with U.S. support, Egypt increased
efforts to fight militants in Sinai,
including with the use of air power. But
the area remained highly unstable.
Then, in late October, two more
events occurred in quick succession that
demonstrated how truly complicated and
unstable the situation had become.
On October 23, the Emir of Qatar,
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani,
visited Gaza at the invitation of Hamas.
It was the first time a head of state had
gone to the isolated enclave since
Hamas took control in 2007, and both
sides played up the symbolism. The
Emir drove in from Egypt in a lavish
motorcade of about fifty black
Mercedes-Benzes and armored Toyotas,
and Hamas greeted him with all the
pomp and circumstance it could muster.
Ismail Haniya, the Hamas Prime
Minister, declared that the Qatari visit
marked the end of the “political and
economic siege that was imposed on
Gaza” and introduced his wife in her
first public appearance. For his part, the
Emir pledged $400 million in
development aid, more than Gaza
received from all other international
donors combined. He was accompanied
by his wife, Sheikha Moza, and his
cousin Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani, or
HBJ as we called him, who served as
Qatar’s Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister.
For Haniya and Hamas, this was an
opportunity to get out from behind the
shadow of Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas, recognized
by the international community as the
legitimate leader of the Palestinian
people, and to show that their future was
bright despite any estrangement from
Syria and Iran. For Qatar, it was a
chance to revel in a newfound regional
influence and stake a claim as the Arab
world’s chief backer of the Palestinian
cause. For Israel, it was a source of
growing concern. For the United States,
which continued to view Hamas as a
dangerous terrorist organization, Qatar
was a conundrum that illustrated the
complexity of dealing with the Middle
East during this turbulent time.
Geographically Qatar looks like a
small finger extending into the Persian
Gulf from Saudi Arabia. At just over
4,400 square miles, it’s less than half the
size of Vermont, but it is blessed with
extensive reserves of oil and natural gas
and, per capita, is one of the wealthiest
countries in the world. There are only
about a quarter of a million Qatari
citizens, but many times that number of
foreign workers are imported to keep the
country running. Sheikh Hamad deposed
his father to become Emir in 1995 and
soon set about raising Qatar’s profile.
Under his governance, the booming
capital city of Doha came to rival Dubai
and Abu Dhabi as regional hubs of trade
and culture, and its satellite television
network Al Jazeera became the most
influential source of news in the Middle
East and a platform for Qatar to
influence the entire region.
Like its Gulf neighbors, Qatar had
little in the way of democracy or respect
for universal human rights, but it has
maintained strong strategic and security
ties with the United States, and it hosts a
major U.S. Air Force installation. This
balancing act was put to the test across
the Gulf during the Arab Spring.
The Emir and HBJ maneuvered to
take advantage of the regional upheaval
and position Qatar as a champion of the
revolutions. Their goal was to turn their
small nation into a major power in the
Middle East by backing the Muslim
Brotherhood and other Islamists across
the region. The other Gulf monarchies
feared that such a course would invite
instability at home, but the Qataris saw a
chance to build influence with the new
players emerging on the scene and to
champion their conservative cultural
views, along with distracting attention
from their own lack of reform at home.
Using the soft power of Al Jazeera
and their bottomless checkbook, the
Emir and HBJ bankrolled Morsi in
Egypt, funneled weapons to Islamist
rebels in Libya and Syria, and built new
ties to Hamas in Gaza. Qatari fighter jets
also helped enforce the no-fly zone in
Libya. Everywhere you turned in the
Middle East in those days, you saw the
hand of Qatar. It was an impressive
diplomatic tour de force, and in some
instances Qatar’s efforts aligned with
our own. But other Arab nations and
Israel saw Qatar’s support for Islamist
forces and extremist elements as posing
a growing threat. The Emir’s visit to
Gaza crystallized the problem. (In 2013,
with Islamists in retreat in Egypt and
elsewhere, the Emir abdicated in favor
of his son, and HBJ was replaced by a
low-profile former Deputy Interior
Minister. Relations among the Gulf
states reached a nadir in March 2014,
when Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the
UAE withdrew their Ambassadors from
Qatar.)
Within hours of the Emir’s visit to
Gaza, explosions rocked a weapons
factory in Khartoum, Sudan. Sudanese
officials said that four warplanes had
flown in from the east and bombed the
factory, killing two people. They pointed
the finger squarely at Israel. It was not
the first time. Over the previous four
years the Sudanese had accused Israel of
conducting several air strikes against
targets in their country. Just that
September, a shipment of rockets and
munitions bound for Gaza was destroyed
south of Khartoum. The Israelis declined
to comment about the factory explosion,
but a senior Defense Ministry official
noted that Sudan “is supported by Iran,
and it serves as a route for the transfer,
via Egyptian territory, of Iranian
weapons to Hamas and Islamic Jihad
terrorists.”
Sudan certainly had a checkered
history with terrorism. It harbored
Osama bin Laden in the early 1990s, and
in 1993, the State Department designated
it a state sponsor of terrorism. Sudan
also maintained close ties with both Iran
and Hamas. Shortly after the explosion
at the weapons factory, two Iranian
warships visited Port Sudan. Hamas
leader Khaled Meshal visited Khartoum
a few weeks later.
Taken together, all of these regional
factors—rocket fire from Gaza,
instability in the Sinai, Qatari power
plays, Iranian meddling, smuggling from
Sudan—made for an intensely
combustible situation in the fall of 2012.
In November, the cauldron boiled over.

On November 14, 2012, I was with
Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta and
Joint Chiefs of Staff General Martin
Dempsey in Perth, Australia, for annual
consultations with our Australian allies
in a conference center in Kings Park,
overlooking the city and the Swan River.
As our afternoon session was breaking
up, Panetta got word that Israeli Defense
Minister Barak was urgently trying to
reach him. Panetta stepped into a kitchen
area to take the secure call from
Jerusalem. After lunch, he joined
General Dempsey and me on a patio to
share Barak’s report. I could tell from
his face that things were about to get
complicated. The Israeli military was
about to launch a major air campaign
against militants in Gaza. The bombing
runs would start imminently.
From peaceful Perth, the prospect of
another war in the Middle East felt a
million miles away (actually about
seven thousand), but this was deadly
serious. I told Panetta and Dempsey that
the Israeli response was understandable.
The Hamas rockets were becoming
increasingly advanced and accurate, to
the point of even threatening Tel Aviv,
forty miles from the border. Residents
there hadn’t faced air-raid warnings
since the first Gulf War in 1991, when
Saddam Hussein launched Scud missiles
at Israel. Every country has the right to
defend itself, and no government could
be expected to accept such provocation.
Still any escalation in violence was
going to make the situation that much
harder to contain, and no one wanted to
see a repeat of the all-out war that raged
only four years earlier.
The first major round of air strikes
killed Ahmed Jabari, a terrorist accused
of planning many attacks against Israelis
over the years. Over the next two days
people on both sides were killed. The
front page of the New York Times on
November 16 was dominated by
dramatic side-by-side photographs of
funerals in Gaza City and Jerusalem.
According to Israel, during that week
more than 1,500 rockets were fired from
Gaza. Six Israelis, four civilians and
two soldiers, were killed, and more than
two hundred were injured. Many Israeli
families were forced to evacuate their
homes in southern areas near Gaza as
rockets continued to rain down from the
sky. Hundreds of Palestinians were
reportedly killed in the air campaign the
Israeli military called Operation Pillar
of Defense.
I received frequent updates from
Ambassador Dan Shapiro and his team
at our embassy in Tel Aviv and from our
experts back in Washington. Deputy
Secretary Bill Burns, who had served as
the Department’s top Middle East
official under Colin Powell, once again
gathered information for me. Bill and I
agreed that there was a limited window
in which diplomacy might be able to
head off further escalation of the
conflict.
I called Egyptian Foreign Minister
Mohamed Amr to see if there was
anything Egypt could do to ratchet down
the tensions. “We can’t accept this,”
Amr said of the Israeli air strikes.
Though Mubarak had been replaced as
President by Morsi, a leader of the
Muslim Brotherhood, I hoped Egypt
would remain a key intermediary and
voice for peace. I appealed to Amr’s
sensitivity about Egypt’s stature. “I think
your role in this is very important and I
urge you to do everything you can to
deescalate the situation,” I said, telling
him that Egypt had to talk to Hamas and
urge them to cease bombing Israel. Israel
was only acting in self-defense, I argued,
and “there is no country on earth that can
sit by and absorb rockets being fired at
their people.” Amr agreed to try. “I hope
both of us can do something to stop this
craziness,” he said. “We need to work
together in a close effort.”
As I traveled across Australia, from
Perth to Adelaide, and then to
Singapore, President Obama and I
stayed in close contact, coordinating the
pressure we were placing on our Middle
Eastern counterparts. He leaned on
Morsi and consulted with Prime
Minister Netanyahu and Prime Minister
Erdoğan, urging all sides to push for a
cease-fire. As we compared notes, we
considered whether more direct
engagement made sense. Should I fly to
the Middle East to try to end the
violence?
Neither of us was sure my going was
the wisest course. For starters, he and I
had serious business to attend to in Asia.
After a quick stop in Singapore, I was
planning to meet President Obama in
Thailand and then travel to Burma with
him for a historic visit intended to
bolster that country’s nascent democratic
opening. Then we were to go to
Cambodia for a big summit of Asian
leaders that was expected to be
dominated by delicate diplomacy over
the South China Sea. Personal attention
counts for a lot in Asia, so leaving now
would come at a cost.
That wasn’t all: The President was
understandably wary of our taking on a
direct mediation role in the middle of
another messy conflict in the Middle
East. If we tried to broker a cease-fire
and failed, as seemed quite likely, it
would sap America’s prestige and
credibility in the region. There was even
a good chance that direct U.S.
engagement would set back the cause of
peace by raising the profile of the
conflict and prompting both sides to
stiffen their negotiating positions. That
was the last thing he or I wanted or
America needed.
I continued as planned with the Asia
trip, spending as much time as possible
on the phone with key Middle Eastern
leaders and concerned European allies.
On every call I argued that the best path
forward would be a simultaneous ceasefire between Israel and Hamas.
The stakes were high. The Israeli
Cabinet had called up seventy-five
thousand reservists for a possible
ground invasion of Gaza. As feared, this
was shaping up as a replay of the
January 2009 war, which had taken a
horrendous toll on the people of Gaza
and on Israel’s reputation globally. It
was imperative to resolve the crisis
before it became a ground war. The only
good news was that the Iron Dome air
defense system that we had helped build
to protect Israel from rockets was
working even better than expected. The
Israeli military reported the Iron Dome
had a success rate of more than 80
percent for all rockets it targeted. Even
if that was a generous estimate, the
success rate was astonishing. Still, one
rocket from Gaza hitting its targets was
one too many, and the Israelis were
determined to go after the stockpiles and
launch sites in Gaza.
When I joined President Obama in
Bangkok on November 18, I reported
that my telephone diplomacy was
running into a difficult reality: Neither
side wanted to be seen blinking first. He
was finding the same thing with his
calls. This is why I kept pushing the idea
of a simultaneous cease-fire, with both
sides stepping back from the brink at the
same time.
“Hamas is trying to propose
conditions before a cease-fire. Israel
will never accept that and we have no
more than forty-eight hours before Israel
might launch a ground offensive, which
will be devastating,” I warned Qatar’s
HBJ an hour after arriving in Bangkok.
The President and I paid a quiet
private visit to the ailing King of
Thailand in a Bangkok hospital and
walked together around the famous Wat
Pho temple, home to Thailand’s largest
gold “reclining Buddha” statue, more
than 150 feet long. Despite the
surroundings, our conversation kept
coming back to Gaza. There was no
doubt in either of our minds that Israel
had a right to defend itself. But we also
knew that a ground invasion could be
catastrophic for all concerned.
Two days later the situation was so
dire that I decided to raise again with the
President the idea of my leaving Asia
and flying to the Middle East to
personally intervene in the conflict. It
was fraught with risk, but even if we
failed, the danger of an impending wider
war was now too great to hold anything
back. First thing that morning, I went
upstairs to the President’s suite in the
elegant old Raffles Hotel Le Royal in
Phnom Penh, Cambodia. He was still in
the shower, so I waited for a few
minutes. As he drank his morning coffee,
we talked over what to do. He remained
wary. What were the chances that my
going would actually stop the violence?
Would it look like we were undercutting
Israel? What might be the unintended
consequences of putting America in the
middle of this mess? We discussed all
those questions and more. In the end we
agreed that peace in the Middle East
was a compelling national security
priority; it was crucial to avoid another
ground war in Gaza; and there was no
substitute for American leadership.
The President wasn’t 100 percent
there yet, but he agreed that I should start
getting ready to go. Huma and our
traveling team began scrambling to work
out the logistics of diverting from
Cambodia to Israel, not exactly your
typical route. It was only two days
before Thanksgiving, and there was no
telling how long this would take, so I
encouraged anyone from the staff who
needed to get home to hitch a ride back
to the States with the President on Air
Force One.
Later that morning the President and I
huddled one more time in a makeshift
“hold room” in Phnom Penh’s massive
Peace Palace conference center. In a
small space cordoned off by pipes and
drapes, we went over the pros and cons
one more time. Jake Sullivan, Tom
Donilon, and Ben Rhodes joined us for a
final go-round. Donilon was nervous,
having been burned too many times over
the years by misadventures in the Middle
East, but eventually he agreed I should
go. The President listened to all the
arguments and then made his decision. It
was time to act. We might not succeed,
but we sure were going to get caught
trying.
The President said he would call both
Morsi and Bibi from Air Force One on
the way back to Washington to try to
make more headway before I touched
down. His parting advice was familiar
encouragement. Just as when we
negotiated the fate of the blind human
rights dissident Chen Guangcheng, the
President’s message was clear: “Don’t
screw up!” I wasn’t planning to.

On the eleven-hour flight from
Cambodia to Israel, I thought long and
hard about the complexities of the crisis.
You couldn’t understand what was going
on in Gaza without also understanding
the path these rockets had taken before
they were launched, winding their way
from Iran through Sudan and ultimately
to Hamas, and what those links meant for
regional security. You also had to
understand the increasingly significant
role technology played. The rockets
were getting more and more
sophisticated, but so were Israel’s air
defenses. Which would prove decisive?
Then you had to consider how the
conflict in Syria was creating friction
between Sunni Hamas and its longtime
Shiite patrons in Damascus and Tehran,
at the same time that the Sunni Muslim
Brotherhood was rising in Cairo and the
Syrian civil war continued to unfold.
What about the growing instability in the
Sinai and the pressure it was putting on
the new Egyptian government? Israel
was heading toward elections, and
Netanyahu’s coalition was far from
stable. How would Israel’s domestic
politics influence his stance on Gaza?
All these questions and many more
would be swirling as I tried to negotiate
a cease-fire.
From the plane I called German
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle,
who was in Jerusalem conducting his
own consultations. “I’m sitting here in
the hotel you will stay in—we just had a
rocket alarm and had to leave our
rooms,” he told me. “You can’t imagine
how nervous the situation is.”
At nearly 10 P.M. on November 20,
we landed at Ben Gurion International
Airport in Tel Aviv and drove the thirty
minutes to Netanyahu’s office in
Jerusalem. I went right upstairs and sat
down with the Prime Minister and a
small group of our aides. The Israelis
told us they had already begun talks with
the Egyptians, who were representing
Hamas, but they were foundering on
long-standing and difficult issues
regarding Israel’s embargo of Gaza,
freedom of movement for its people,
fishing rights off the coast, and other
existing tensions. Bibi and his team were
very pessimistic that any deal could be
reached. They said they were serious
about launching a ground invasion into
Gaza if nothing changed. They would
give me some time, but not much. I was
now on the clock.
As the hours went by, the Prime
Minister’s staff kept wheeling in carts of
food, stacked high with grilled cheese
sandwiches and tiny éclairs. Comfort
food in the midst of high stress, though
nobody was looking at his or her watch.
I appreciated the fact that Bibi and his
team held nothing back around me. They
interrupted and contradicted one another,
even the Prime Minister.
Netanyahu was under a lot of pressure
to invade. Opinion polls in Israel
strongly favored such a step, especially
among Bibi’s Likud base. But Israeli
military commanders were warning of
high numbers of casualties, and
Netanyahu was also concerned about the
regional consequences. How would
Egypt react? Would Hezbollah begin
attacking from Lebanon? He also knew
that the military had achieved most of its
goals within the first few hours of
sustained air strikes, especially
degrading Hamas’s long-range rocket
capabilities, and that Iron Dome was
doing a good job protecting Israeli
citizens. Bibi didn’t want a ground war,
but he was having trouble finding an exit
ramp that would allow Israel to
disengage and deescalate without
making it seem as if it was backing
down in the face of continued Hamas
defiance, which would only invite more
violence later. Meanwhile Mubarak was
gone and the Israelis didn’t trust the new
Muslim Brotherhood government in
Cairo. That made the role of the United
States even more crucial. At least one
Israeli official later told me that this was
the hardest choice Netanyahu had faced
as Prime Minister.
I said I was going to fly to Cairo the
next day, and I wanted to bring with me
a document that I could present to
President Morsi as the basis for final
negotiations. The key, I thought, was to
be sure to have a few points where the
Israelis would be willing to make
concessions if pressed, so Morsi could
feel as if he had gotten a good deal for
the Palestinians. We went round and
round on the specifics without finding a
formula that would work.
We broke up the meeting after
midnight, and I headed to the iconic
eighty-year-old King David Hotel for a
few hours of restless sleep. It seemed
more likely than not that this diplomatic
mission would fail and Israeli troops
would enter Gaza. In the morning I drove
to Ramallah to consult with Abbas.
Though his influence here was limited, I
didn’t want to exclude him and in any
way lend legitimacy to Hamas in the
inter-Palestinian power struggle. I also
knew that the Palestinian Authority
continued to pay salaries and stipends to
thousands of people in Gaza, despite
Hamas rule, so it would be helpful to
have Abbas’s support for a cease-fire.
By this time the Palestinian Authority
headquarters in Ramallah was familiar
ground to me. Known as the Mukataa, it
was originally built as a British fort in
the 1920s and became famous in 2002,
when the Israeli Army besieged the
compound with Yasser Arafat and his
top aides trapped inside and eventually
destroyed most of it. In 2012, there were
few signs of that violent history. The
complex had been rebuilt and now
included Arafat’s limestone mausoleum,
where a Palestinian honor guard stood
watch as visitors came to pay their
respects.
It had been a difficult year for Abbas.
His popularity was sagging, and the
economy in the West Bank was slowing.
After the Israeli settlement moratorium
expired in late 2010 and he pulled out of
direct negotiations, Abbas had decided
to petition the UN to recognize Palestine
as an independent state. He had staked
his career on the idea that statehood
could be achieved through peaceful
means—as opposed to the Hamas vision
of armed struggle—and the failure of
negotiations severely undercut his
political position. Abbas felt he needed
to find another nonviolent avenue to
press forward if he was going to keep
his hold on power and continue to offer
a viable alternative to the extremists. A
symbolic vote at the UN was unlikely to
do much for the everyday life of
Palestinians, but sticking it to Israel on
the world stage and exposing its growing
isolation would bolster Abbas at home
—and, the Palestinians argued, might
encourage Israel to make concessions.
The problem was that going to the UN
ran counter to the crucial idea that peace
could be achieved only by negotiations
between the parties, with compromises
from both sides. Unilateral actions,
whether it was a Palestinian statehood
bid at the UN or Israeli settlement
construction in the West Bank, eroded
trust and made it harder to foster those
compromises.
Throughout 2011, we unsuccessfully
tried to convince Abbas to abandon his
petition, while also working to make
sure there would not be enough votes in
the Security Council to move it forward.
(We wanted to avoid having to use our
veto if possible.) At the same time, I
began working with the EU’s Cathy
Ashton and Tony Blair on a framework
for restarting direct negotiations based
on terms of reference President Obama
had outlined in his May 2011 speech.
There was a flurry of diplomacy at the
UN General Assembly in September
2011, but it was not enough to dissuade
Abbas from submitting his petition and
forcing the issue. Thanks to our behindthe-scenes cajoling, it went nowhere in
the Security Council. All Abbas got for
his troubles—besides strained relations
with the United States and Israel—was
membership at UNESCO, the UN
cultural agency. He pledged to return in
2012 and try again.
Now Hamas was upstaging Abbas
with its headline-grabbing resistance to
Israel and making him look tired and
weak to his people. I think he was
grateful for my visit but depressed by his
situation. After a rather desultory
discussion, he agreed to back my
peacemaking efforts and wished me well
in Cairo.
Then it was back to Jerusalem for
another discussion with Netanyahu. His
advisors had called in the middle of the
night and asked us to return for another
meeting before leaving for Cairo. We
went issue by issue, carefully calibrating
how far the Israelis could bend without
breaking and gaming out how things
might go with the Egyptians. By the end
of the meeting we had a strategy in place
and I had Israeli-approved language to
bring to Egypt as a basis for
negotiations.
Then I headed to the airport. While
we were en route, word came of a bus
bombing in Tel Aviv, the first in years.
Dozens of people had been hurt. It was
an ominous reminder of the urgency of
my mission.
Midafternoon on November 21, I
arrived at the Presidential Palace in
Cairo where I had met with Mubarak so
many times before. The building and
household staff were the same, but now
the Muslim Brotherhood was in charge.
So far Morsi had upheld the Camp
David Peace Treaty with Israel, which
had been a cornerstone of regional
stability for decades, but how long
would that last if Israel invaded Gaza
again? Would he seek to reaffirm
Egypt’s traditional role as mediator and
peacemaker and establish himself as an
international statesman? Or would he
move to exploit popular anger and
position himself as the one man in the
Middle East who could stand up to
Israel? We were about to put him to the
test.
Morsi was an unusual politician.
History had thrust him from the back
room to the big chair. In many ways he
was in over his head, trying to learn how
to govern from scratch in a very difficult
setting. Morsi clearly loved the power
of his new position and thrived on the
dance of politics (until it later consumed
him). I was relieved to see that, in the
case of Gaza at least, he seemed more
interested in being a dealmaker than a
demagogue. We met in his office with a
small group of his advisors and began
going through the document I had brought
from Israel’s Prime Minister, line by
line.
I encouraged Morsi to think about
Egypt’s strategic role in the region and
his own role in history. He spoke solid
English, having earned his PhD from the
University of Southern California in
materials science in 1982 and taught at
California State University, Northridge,
until 1985. He scrutinized every phrase
of the text. “What does this mean? Has
this been translated right?” he asked. At
one point he exclaimed, “I don’t accept
this.” “But you proposed it in one of
your early drafts,” I responded. “Oh, we
did? OK,” he agreed. He even overruled
Foreign Minister Amr at one point in the
negotiations and offered a key
concession.
The proposal was brief and to the
point. At an agreed-upon “zero hour,”
Israel would halt all hostilities in Gaza,
from land, sea, and air, and the
Palestinian factions would stop rocket
launches and all other attacks along the
border. Egypt would act as guarantor
and monitor. The tricky part was what
would come next. When would the
Israelis loosen restrictions at the border
crossings so Palestinians could get in
food and supplies? How could Israel be
sure Hamas wasn’t rebuilding its rocket
arsenal? We proposed that these
complicated issues “be dealt with after
twenty-four hours from the start of the
cease-fire.” That was intentionally
vague, the idea being that Egypt could
facilitate substantive talks once the
fighting ended. Netanyahu had given me
the running room to negotiate which
issues were specifically mentioned in
this clause, and I needed it. Morsi
pressed on a few points, and we revised
the list several times, eventually settling
on the following: “Opening the crossings
and facilitating the movements of people
and transfer of goods and refraining from
restricting residents’ free movements
and targeting residents in border areas
and procedures of implementation shall
be dealt with after twenty-four hours
from the start of the cease-fire.”
Throughout the negotiations the
Egyptians were on the phone with the
leaders of Hamas and other Palestinian
extremist factions in Gaza, including
some who were actually sitting in the
offices of the Egyptian intelligence
services across town. Morsi’s team,
new to governing, was tentative with the
Palestinians and seemed uncomfortable
twisting their arms to get a deal done.
We kept reminding the Muslim
Brotherhood men that they now
represented a major regional power, and
it was their responsibility to deliver.
I updated President Obama frequently
and spoke to Netanyahu several times.
He and Morsi wouldn’t speak directly to
each other, so I served as the conduit for
a high-stakes game of telephone
negotiations, while Jake and our
formidable Ambassador in Cairo, Anne
Patterson, were drilling down on some
of the trickier details with Morsi’s
advisors.
Netanyahu was intent on gaining U.S.
and Egyptian help to block new weapons
shipments into Gaza. He didn’t want to
end the air strikes and then find himself
back in this untenable position in another
year or two. When I pressed Morsi on
that point, he agreed it would be in
Egypt’s security interests as well. But
he, in turn, wanted a commitment to
reopen Gaza’s borders to humanitarian
aid and other goods as soon as possible,
plus greater freedom of movement for
Palestinian fishing boats off the coast.
Netanyahu was willing to be flexible on
these points if he received assurances on
the weapons and the rockets stopped.
With each turn of the discussion, we
inched closer and closer to an
understanding.
After hours of intense negotiation we
hammered out an agreement. The ceasefire would go into effect at 9 P.M. local
time, just a few hours away. (It was an
arbitrary time, but we needed to come up
with a clear answer to the basic question
“When will the violence stop?”) But
before we could declare victory, there
was one more piece of business to attend
to. We had agreed that President Obama
would call Bibi, both to personally ask
him to agree to the cease-fire and to
promise increased American assistance
cracking down on weapons smuggling
into Gaza. Was this political cover so
Bibi could tell his Cabinet and his
voters he had called off the invasion
because Israel’s most important ally had
begged him? Or did he take some
personal satisfaction from making the
President jump through hoops? Either
way, if this was what it would take to
seal the deal, we needed to get it done.
Meanwhile my team anxiously
watched the clock. It was now after 6:00
in Cairo on the night before
Thanksgiving. Air Force regulations
about crew rest were going to kick in
soon, which would mean we wouldn’t
be able to take off until the next day. But
if we left soon, under the wire, we might
just make it back in time for people to
spend the holiday with their families.
Any snags, and the only turkey we’d be
eating for Thanksgiving would be the
Air Force’s famous turkey taco salad. Of
course, this wasn’t the first holiday
threatened by the crazy demands of
international diplomacy, and no one on
my team complained; they just wanted to
get the job done.
Finally all the pieces were in place,
the call was made, and we received the
go-ahead from Jerusalem and
Washington. Essam al-Haddad, Morsi’s
national security advisor, got down on
his knees to thank God. Foreign Minister
Amr and I walked downstairs to a jampacked press conference and announced
that a cease-fire had been agreed to. It
was absolute pandemonium in there,
with emotions running high. Amr spoke
of “Egypt’s historic responsibility
toward the Palestinian cause” and also
its “keenness to stop the bloodshed” and
preserve regional stability. The new
Muslim Brotherhood government would
never seem as credible again as it did
that day. I thanked President Morsi for
his mediation and praised the agreement,
but cautioned, “There is no substitute for
a just and lasting peace” that “advances
the security, dignity, and legitimate
aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis
alike.” So our work was far from over. I
pledged that “in the days ahead, the
United States will work with partners
across the region to consolidate this
progress, improve conditions for the
people of Gaza, and provide security for
the people of Israel.”
As our motorcade raced through the
streets of Cairo that night, I wondered
how long—or even if—the cease-fire
would hold. The region had seen so
many cycles of violence and dashed
hopes. It would take only a few
extremists and a rocket launcher to
reignite the conflict. Both sides would
have to work hard to preserve the peace.
And even if they succeeded, there would
be difficult talks over the coming days
about all the complex issues we had
deferred in the agreement. I could easily
be back here soon, trying to put the
pieces together again.
At 9 P.M., as scheduled, the skies
above Gaza grew quiet. But in the streets
below thousands of Palestinians
celebrated. Hamas leaders, who had
narrowly avoided another devastating
Israeli invasion, declared victory. In
Israel, Netanyahu adopted a somber tone
and speculated that it was still “very
possible” that he would be forced to
launch “a much harsher military
operation” if the cease-fire did not hold.
Yet despite these contrasting reactions,
it seemed to me that the two most
important strategic outcomes of the
conflict boded quite well for Israel.
First, for the time being at least, Egypt
remained a partner for peace, which had
been in serious doubt since the fall of
Mubarak. Second, the success of Iron
Dome in shooting down incoming
rockets had reinforced Israel’s
“qualitative military edge” and exposed
the futility of Hamas’s military threats.
When we got to the plane, I asked
Jake if the agreement was still holding. I
was only half joking. He said yes, and I
settled in for the long flight home.
As it turned out, the cease-fire held
better than anyone expected. In 2013,
Israel enjoyed the quietest year in a
decade. Later, one senior Israeli official
confided to me that his government had
been forty-eight hours away from
launching a ground invasion of Gaza and
that my diplomatic intervention was the
only thing standing in the way of a much
more explosive confrontation. Of course,
I continue to believe that over the long
run nothing will do more to secure
Israel’s future as a Jewish democratic
state than a comprehensive peace based
on two states for two peoples.
PART SIX

The Future We
Want
21

Climate Change: We’re
All in This Together

No! No! No!” the Chinese official said,
waving his arms across the doorway.
The President of the United States was
barging uninvited into a closed meeting
with the Premier of China—and there
was no way to stop him.
When you’re a senior official
representing the United States abroad,
let alone the President or Secretary of
State, every movement is carefully
planned and every door opens on cue.
You get used to being whisked through
busy city centers in motorcades,
bypassing customs and security at the
airport, and never having to wait for an
elevator. But sometimes protocol breaks
down and diplomacy gets messy. That’s
when you have to improvise. This was
one of those times.
President Obama and I were looking
for Premier Wen Jiabao in the middle of
a large international conference on
climate change in Copenhagen,
Denmark. In December 2009, that
charming city was cold, dark, and
uncharacteristically tense. We knew that
the only way to achieve a meaningful
agreement on climate change was for
leaders of the nations emitting the most
greenhouse gases to sit down together
and hammer out a compromise—
especially the United States and China.
The choices and trade-offs confronting
us would be difficult. New clean energy
technologies and greater efficiencies
might allow us to cut emissions while
creating jobs and exciting new
industries, and even help emerging
economies leapfrog the dirtiest phases of
industrial development. But there was no
getting around the fact that combating
climate change was going to be a hard
political sell at a time when the world
was already reeling from a global
financial crisis. All economies ran
primarily on fossil fuels. Changing that
would require bold leadership and
international cooperation.
But the Chinese were avoiding us.
Worse, we learned that Wen had called
a “secret” meeting with the Indians,
Brazilians, and South Africans to stop,
or at least dilute, the kind of agreement
the United States was seeking. When we
couldn’t find any of the leaders of those
countries, we knew something was
amiss and sent out members of our team
to canvass the conference center.
Eventually they discovered the meeting’s
location.
After exchanging looks of “Are you
thinking what I’m thinking?” the
President and I set off through the long
hallways of the sprawling Nordic
convention center, with a train of experts
and advisors scrambling to keep up.
Later we’d joke about this impromptu
“footcade,” a motorcade without the
motors, but at the time I was focused on
the diplomatic challenge waiting at the
end of our march. So off we went,
charging up a flight of stairs and
encountering surprised Chinese officials,
who tried to divert us by sending us in
the opposite direction. We were
undeterred. Newsweek later described us
as “a diplomatic version of Starsky and
Hutch.”
When we arrived outside the meeting
room, there was a jumble of arguing
aides and nervous security agents.
Robert Gibbs, the White House Press
Secretary, got tangled up with a Chinese
guard. In the commotion the President
slipped through the door and yelled,
“Mr. Premier!” really loudly, which got
everyone’s attention. The Chinese
guards put their arms up against the door
again, but I ducked under and made it
through.
In a makeshift conference room whose
glass walls had been covered by drapes
for privacy against prying eyes, we
found Wen wedged around a long table
with Indian Prime Minister Manmohan
Singh, Brazilian President Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva, and South African
President Jacob Zuma. Jaws dropped
when they saw us.
“Are you ready?” said President
Obama, flashing a big grin. Now the real
negotiations could begin.

It was a moment that was at least a year
in the making. In our 2008 campaigns
both Senator Obama and I highlighted
climate change as an urgent challenge for
our country and the world, and we
offered plans to curb emissions, improve
energy efficiency, and develop clean
energy technologies. We tried to level
with the American people about the hard
choices to come while avoiding the old
false choice between the economy and
the environment.
The problems posed by global
warming were evident, despite the
deniers. There was a mountain of
overwhelming scientific data about the
damaging effects of carbon dioxide,
methane, and other greenhouse gases.
Thirteen of the top fourteen warmest
years on record have all come since
2000. Extreme weather events, including
fires, heat waves, and droughts are
measurably on the rise. If this continues,
it will cause additional challenges,
displacing millions of people, sparking
competition over scarce resources such
as fresh water, and destabilizing fragile
states.
Once in office, President Obama and I
agreed that climate change represented
both a significant national security threat
and a major test of American leadership.
We knew that the United Nations would
hold a major climate conference at the
end of our first year in office and that it
would be an opportunity to galvanize
broad international action. So we began
laying the groundwork.
This was part of a bigger story about
how our foreign policy had to change.
During the Cold War, Secretaries of
State could focus nearly exclusively on
traditional issues of war and peace, such
as nuclear arms control. In the 21st
century we’ve also had to pay attention
to the emerging global challenges that
affect everyone in our interdependent
world: pandemic diseases, financial
contagion, international terrorism,
transnational criminal networks, human
and wildlife trafficking—and, of course,
climate change.
Movement on the domestic front
began quickly in 2009, as the new
Obama Administration started working
with Congress on ambitious “cap-andtrade” legislation that would create a
market for pricing, buying, and selling
carbon emissions, while also taking
direct action through federal agencies
like the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and passing legislation
that provided incentives to generate
more solar and wind power. There was
a lot of excitement when a bill passed
the House of Representatives in June
with the leadership of Congressmen
Henry Waxman from California and Ed
Markey from Massachusetts, but it
quickly got bogged down in the Senate.
Internationally, we had tough going.
From the start I knew it would take
creative and persistent diplomacy to
build a network of global partners
willing to tackle climate change
together. Building this kind of coalition,
especially when the policy choices
involved are so difficult, is much harder
than herding cats. The first step was
embracing the international negotiations
process called the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which allowed all participating
nations to discuss this shared challenge
at a single venue. The goal was to gather
everyone in Copenhagen in December
2009 and try to strike a deal between the
developed and developing countries.
I needed an experienced negotiator
with expertise in climate and energy
issues to lead this effort, so I asked
Todd Stern to become Special Envoy for
Climate Change. I knew Todd from his
work in the 1990s as a negotiator on the
Kyoto Accord, which Vice President Al
Gore championed and Bill signed but the
Senate never ratified. Beneath a calm
demeanor, Todd is a passionate and
dogged diplomat. During the years of the
Bush Administration he worked
diligently on climate and energy issues
at the Center for American Progress.
Now he would have to use all his skill
to cajole reluctant nations to come to the
negotiating table and compromise. I
wanted to give him as much of a running
start as possible, so I brought him with
me on my first trip to Asia. If we didn’t
convince China, Japan, South Korea, and
Indonesia to adopt better climate
policies, it would be nearly impossible
to reach a credible international
agreement.
In Beijing, Todd and I visited the
high-tech gas-fired Taiyanggong
Thermal Power Plant, which emits half
the carbon dioxide of a coal-powered
plant and uses a third of the water. After
getting a look at the state-of-the-art
turbines manufactured by General
Electric, I spoke to a Chinese audience
about the economic opportunities that
come from addressing the challenges of
climate change. Their government had
begun making huge investments in clean
energy, especially in solar and wind, but
was refusing to commit to any binding
international agreements on emissions.
Todd spent many hours then and later
trying to convince them to change their
minds.
Our early focus on China was no
accident. Thanks to its tremendous
economic growth over the past decade,
China was quickly becoming the world’s
largest overall emitter of greenhouse
gases. (Chinese officials were always
quick to point out that their country’s per
capita emission rate still lagged far
behind that of the industrialized West,
particularly the United States. Although
on that score, too, they are rapidly
catching up.) China was also the largest
and most influential of a new group of
regional and global powers, including
Brazil, India, Indonesia, Turkey, and
South Africa, who were gaining
international clout more for their
expanding economies than their military
might. Their cooperation would be
essential for any comprehensive
agreement on climate change.
Each in its own way, these countries
were grappling with the implications of
their growing weight and influence. For
example, China had moved hundreds of
millions of people out of poverty since
Deng Xiaoping opened it to the world in
1978, but in 2009, 100 million people
still lived on less than a dollar per day.
The Communist Party’s commitment to
raising incomes and decreasing poverty
relied on increasing industrial output.
That posed a stark choice: Could China
afford to tackle climate change while so
many millions were still so poor? Could
it follow a different development path,
relying on more efficient and renewable
energy, that would still decrease
poverty? China was not the only nation
struggling with this question. When you
govern a country that has deep
inequalities and poverty, it’s
understandable to believe you can’t
afford to restrain your growth just
because 19th- and 20th-century
industrial powers polluted their way to
prosperity. If India could improve the
lives of millions of its citizens by
accelerating industrial growth, how
could it afford to choose a different
path? The answers given by these
countries as to whether they would be
part of combating climate change, even
though they hadn’t caused it, would
determine the success or failure of our
diplomacy.
With this in mind, Todd and I went
together to India in the summer of 2009.
After proudly showing us around one of
the greenest buildings near Delhi and
offering me a flowered garland,
Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh
surprised us during our public speeches
by throwing down a rhetorical gauntlet.
Taking steps to address climate change
should be the responsibility of wealthy
countries like the United States, he
declared, not emerging powers like
India that had more pressing domestic
challenges to worry about. In our private
conversation, Ramesh reiterated that
India’s per capita emissions were below
that of developed countries, and he
argued that there was no legitimate basis
for international pressure being put on
India in the run-up to Copenhagen.
But it was a stubborn fact that it
would be impossible to stop the rise in
global temperatures if these rapidly
developing countries insisted on playing
by the old rules and pumping massive
amounts of carbon into the atmosphere.
Even if the United States somehow
reduced our emissions all the way to
zero tomorrow, total global levels still
would be nowhere near where they need
to be if China, India, and others failed to
contain their own emissions. What’s
more, the same poor people the Indian
Minister was concerned about helping
would be the ones most vulnerable to the
ravages of climate change. So in my
response to his comments I said that the
United States would do its part to
develop clean technologies that would
drive economic growth and fight poverty
while also reducing emissions. But, I
emphasized, it was crucial for the whole
world to embrace this as a shared
mission and responsibility. This was a
debate that would continue in the
following months, shape the negotiating
positions when countries gathered for
the UN’s climate conference in Denmark
that December, and provoke the secret
meeting the President and I crashed.

Copenhagen is a picturesque city, full of
cobblestoned streets and parks. But
when I arrived in the dead of winter in
the middle of a swirling snowstorm just
past 3 A.M. on December 17, 2009, it
was bitterly cold and the negotiations
had gone into deep freeze. In just two
days the conference would end, and it
seemed as if this opportunity for action
would slip through the world’s fingers.
On one side of the debate were the
emerging powers, or as I began to think
of them, the “emerging emitters,”
considering their quickly growing share
of total carbon dioxide output. Most of
them were seeking to avoid a binding
agreement that would limit their growth.
On another side were the Europeans,
still hoping to extend the Kyoto Accord
that had placed big burdens on rich
nations but essentially had given large
developing countries like China and
India a free pass. Many poor and small
countries, especially the island nations,
were desperate for an agreement that
would help them stave off or at least
mitigate the climate changes they were
already experiencing.
The United States was pushing for
what we considered a realistic
achievable outcome: a diplomatic
agreement agreed to by leaders (rather
than a legal treaty ratified by
Parliaments and enforceable by courts),
which would commit every major
nation, developed and developing alike,
to take substantive steps to curb carbon
emissions and report transparently on
their progress—neither of which had
ever happened before. We didn’t expect
every country to take the same steps or
even cut emissions by an equal amount,
but we were seeking an agreement
requiring every country to assume some
responsibility to reduce emissions.
One of my first meetings in
Copenhagen was with the Alliance of
Small Island States. It is estimated that
global sea levels rose by 6.7 inches over
the course of the 20th century. As Arctic
ice continues to melt, sea levels will
continue to rise at an increasing rate and
threaten the very existence of some of
these small countries. In 2012, when I
visited the Cook Islands for a meeting of
the Pacific Island Forum, leaders there
told me that climate change was the
single greatest threat facing their nations.
Islands and low-lying nations are on
the front lines of this struggle, but the
rest of us are not far behind. About 40
percent of all humankind lives within
sixty miles of a coast. Sprawling cities
near coastal deltas, including those of
the Mississippi, Nile, Ganges, and
Mekong rivers, are at particular risk. We
have to project forward and think about
what will happen as climate change
continues and sea levels keep rising.
What will happen to those billions of
people if their homes and cities become
unlivable? Where will they go? Who
will provide assistance?
Imagine the violence that could follow
in the wake of more severe droughts and
extreme food and water shortages in
fragile states, or the effects on global
commerce as farms and infrastructure
are destroyed in floods and storms. What
will be the impact on global trade and
stability as the gap between rich and
poor countries widens further? When I
met in Copenhagen with Ethiopian Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi, who emerged as
a spokesperson for some of the countries
most vulnerable to the effects of climate
change and least able to manage them, he
told me that the world was expecting a
lot from us, and that this was a moment
for American leadership.
Despite all the high hopes leading up
to this conference, and perhaps to a
degree because of them, things went
badly from the start. Interests collided,
nerves frayed, and compromise
appeared out of reach. We needed to
change the dynamic somehow. Early in
the morning on December 17, I called a
press conference. Our team at the
conference hall found a large room with
stadium-style seating, and when I
arrived there were hundreds of
journalists from all over the world
packed in and eager for any bit of news
that might herald a break in the
deadlock. I told the crowd that the
United States was prepared to lead a
collective effort by developed countries
to mobilize $100 billion annually by
2020 from a combination of public and
private sources to help the poorest and
most vulnerable nations mitigate the
damage from climate change—if we
could also reach a broad agreement on
limiting emissions.
The idea began with the Europeans,
particularly British Prime Minister
Gordon Brown, who had proposed a
similar deal in the summer. Prior to my
arrival in Copenhagen, Todd and Deputy
National Security Advisor Mike Froman
recommended that I have it in my back
pocket in case we needed to jump-start
negotiations. By offering a concrete
commitment, I hoped to breathe new life
into the talks, put pressure on China and
the other “emerging emitters” to
respond, and win support from
developing countries who would
welcome this new assistance. The
journalists and delegates started buzzing
immediately, and many were thrilled.
The Danish Prime Minister captured the
changing mood when he said, “There’s a
feeling among negotiators that now we
have to go into business, and now we
have to be flexible, and now we have to
try as hard as we can to make real
compromises.”
But the good feelings didn’t last long.
The fundamentals of the impasse
remained firmly in place. That night,
with President Obama not yet in
Copenhagen, I joined other world
leaders for a contentious debate that
stretched late into the night in a small
and overheated room. The Chinese
weren’t giving an inch; neither were the
Indians and Brazilians. Some of the
Europeans were letting the perfect be the
enemy of the good—and the possible.
We emerged, frustrated and tired,
sometime around 2:00 in the morning,
still without an agreement. Exhausted
Presidents and Prime Ministers rushed
for the exit, only to find a traffic jam of
motorcades and security vehicles. So we
stood there in what amounted to the
world’s most unusual taxi line. Patience
began to wear thin. Here we all were,
hungry and sleepy, with nothing to show
for our efforts. No previous climate
conference had included so many
leaders at the highest level, and yet we
were no closer to reaching an agreement.
Finally President Sarkozy of France
could take no more. He rolled his eyes
and with a look of extreme exasperation,
he declared, in English, “I want to die!”
We all knew what he meant.

What a difference a day makes. Sitting
next to President Obama in the small
leaders’ meeting he and I had just forced
our way into, I hoped that we might
finally be getting somewhere. I looked
across the table at Wen Jiabao, then at
the leaders of India, Brazil, and South
Africa. They represented about 40
percent of the world’s population, and
their place at this table symbolized a
profound shift in global influence.
Countries that just a few decades before
had been marginal players in
international affairs were now making
crucial decisions.
Watching the body language of these
leaders, I was glad that President Obama
had decided to come to Denmark. He
had originally been scheduled to land in
Copenhagen on Friday morning, the final
day of negotiations. We had hoped to
have a deal ready for his arrival, but the
deadlocked negotiations made that
impossible. Back at the White House his
advisors grew nervous. Given how stuck
the talks were, was it even worth the
President’s time to make the trip? This
was another case when I thought we had
to “get caught trying.” I called the
President and assured him that his
personal intervention might provide the
push we needed to break the impasse.
He agreed, and Air Force One soon
touched down in freezing Copenhagen.
Now here we were, making a lastditch effort. Among the sticking points
was this: If nations agreed to cut their
emissions, how would those
commitments be monitored and
enforced? The Chinese, always allergic
to outside scrutiny, were resisting any
robust reporting requirements or
verification mechanisms. The Indians,
however, were more amenable. The
country’s soft-spoken Prime Minister,
Manmohan Singh, was gently pushing
back against the Chinese objections.
President Jacob Zuma of South Africa,
who had been one of our most strident
critics in earlier meetings, was also
more constructive and conciliatory.
We could feel the momentum in the
room shifting, and we weren’t the only
ones. In a surprising display, one of the
other members of the Chinese
delegation, a talented diplomat with
whom we generally had very cordial
relations, started loudly scolding the far
more senior Premier. He was quite
agitated by the prospect that a deal might
actually be at hand. Wen, embarrassed,
instructed his interpreter not to translate
the outburst. Trying to get the meeting
back on track, President Obama, in his
cool and calm way, asked Wen what the
other Chinese official said. The Premier
looked at us and said, “It is not
important.”
In the end, after lots of cajoling,
debating, and compromising, the leaders
in that room fashioned a deal that, while
far from perfect, saved the summit from
failure and put us on the road to future
progress. For the first time all major
economies, developed and developing
alike, agreed to make national
commitments to curb carbon emissions
through 2020 and report transparently on
their mitigation efforts. The world began
moving away from the division between
developed and developing countries that
had defined the Kyoto agreement. This
was a foundation to build on.
That’s what the President and I told
our European friends when we met to
debrief them. Crammed into another
small room, Brown, Sarkozy, Angela
Merkel of Germany, Fredrik Reinfeldt of
Sweden, Lars Rasmussen of Denmark,
and José Manuel Barroso of the
European Commission listened carefully
to President Obama. They wanted a
legal treaty out of Copenhagen and
didn’t like our compromise. However,
they reluctantly agreed to support it
since there was no viable alternative.
The Europeans were right that we didn’t
achieve everything we wanted at
Copenhagen. But that’s the nature of
compromise.
In the months that followed, dozens of
nations, including all the major
developing countries, did in fact submit
proposed plans for limiting emissions.
And they are, as best as we can tell,
acting to implement those plans. We
built on this foundation in follow-on
conferences over the next four years in
Cancun, Durban, and Doha, all leading
to another gathering in Paris in 2015
with the hope of achieving an even
stronger agreement applicable to all.

After Copenhagen, I began looking for
ways to keep making progress, even if
political opposition in Congress and
disagreements with China and others on
the world stage made it difficult to
achieve the kind of sweeping reforms
we needed to combat climate change. As
a girl in Illinois, I played my share of
softball, and one of the lessons that stuck
with me was that if you try to hit only
home runs, you’ll end up popping out
more often than not. But if you also go
for singles and doubles, even walks,
they can add up to something even
bigger.
That was the idea behind the Climate
and Clean Air Coalition I announced in
February 2012, with the purpose of
reducing what’s called “super
pollutants.” More than 30 percent of
global warming is attributed to these
particles, including methane, black
carbon, and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
which are produced by animal waste,
urban landfills, air conditioning units,
burning fields, cooking fires, and oil and
gas production, among other things. The
pollutants are also highly damaging to
people’s respiratory health. The good
news is that these greenhouse gases
disperse in the atmosphere more quickly
than carbon dioxide, so an aggressive
effort to reduce them can slow the rate of
climate change more quickly. According
to one study, “A sharp reduction in
emissions of shorter-lived pollutants
beginning in 2015 could offset warming
temperatures by up to 50 percent by
2050.”
Doing that would buy the world
precious time to develop new
technologies and the political will to
deal with the tougher carbon problems. I
started talking to like-minded
governments, especially the
Scandinavians, about what we could do.
We decided to form a public-private
partnership consisting of governments,
businesses, scientists, and foundations. I
held an event at the State Department
with the Environmental Ministers from
Bangladesh, Canada, Mexico, and
Sweden, the Ambassador from Ghana,
and the Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Lisa
Jackson, to launch the Climate and Clean
Air Coalition. In 2014, there are thirtyseven country partners and forty-four
nonstate partners, and the Coalition is
making important strides toward
reducing methane emissions from oil and
gas production and black carbon from
diesel fumes and other sources.
Addressing waste management in cities
from Nigeria to Malaysia, reducing
black carbon from brick production in
places like Colombia and Mexico, and
curtailing methane emissions in
Bangladesh and Ghana may fly under the
radar, but steps like these are making a
difference in the global effort to address
climate change.
One of my partners in this effort was
Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr
Støre. He invited me to visit Norway
and see firsthand the effects of climate
change on shrinking Arctic glaciers. I
arrived in the picturesque Norwegian
city of Tromsø, which sits north of the
Arctic Circle, in June 2012. In the
summer the temperatures there climbed
into the 40s and daylight lingered nearly
all night. Jonas and I boarded the Arctic
Research Vessel Helmer Hanssen for a
trip up a fjord to get a closer look at the
melting ice. The air was so clean and
crisp, I could hardly believe it. The
mountains, still mostly snow-covered,
seemed to jut up right out of the icy
water. Jonas pointed to the receding
glaciers with concern. Summer thaws
were now leaving parts of the Arctic
Ocean ice-free for weeks at a time. In
fact, glaciers were retreating almost
everywhere around the world, including
in the Alps, Himalayas, Andes, and
Rockies and in Alaska and Africa.
Alaska is warming at twice the rate of
the rest of the United States, and erosion,
melting permafrost, and rising waters
are already forcing some communities
along the coast to relocate further inland.
In 2005, I joined Senator McCain and
two other Republican Senators, Lindsey
Graham and Susan Collins, for a trip to
Whitehorse, Canada, and Barrow,
Alaska, the northernmost point of the
United States. We met with scientists,
local leaders, and First Nations elders to
hear from them about the effects of
climate change. Flying over the vast
coniferous forests of the Yukon, I could
see huge brown swaths of dead spruce
trees, killed off by infestations of bark
beetles that had moved north because of
warmer temperatures, especially the
milder winters. Those dead trees
became kindling for forest fires that the
Canadians told us were happening more
frequently. We could see the smoke for
ourselves as it billowed up from a
nearby blaze.
Virtually everyone I spoke to on that
trip had a personal wake-up call about
what was happening. A tribal elder
recounted how he had returned to a lake
where he had fished as a boy only to find
it dried up. I met lifelong participants in
dogsled races who told me they no
longer even needed to wear gloves. In
Barrow the sea used to freeze all the
way up to the North Pole beginning in
November. Now, residents told us, they
found slush instead of ice. At Kenai
Fjords National Park, rangers showed us
the measurements of the shrinking
glaciers. It had gotten so bad that you
couldn’t even see the ice from the
visitors’ center built a few decades
earlier to showcase the stunning view.
Seven years later, in Norway, I was
seeing even more evidence of the steady
march of climate change. I liked Jonas
and admired his passion for protecting
his country’s precious ecosystem.
Unfortunately there was only so much
Norway could do on its own. So he
threw himself into the intense diplomacy
needed to bring all the Arctic powers
together. He and I discussed our shared
efforts at the Arctic Council, the
international organization responsible
for setting out the rules for protecting the
region. Tromsø is now home to its
permanent headquarters. The Council
includes all the key players: the United
States, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Russia, and Sweden. I
shared Jonas’s commitment to the
Council, and in 2011 I became the first
U.S. Secretary of State to attend one of
its formal meetings, which was held in
Nuuk, the remote capital of Greenland.
One of my allies in pushing greater
American involvement in the Arctic
Council was the Republican Senator
from Alaska Lisa Murkowski. She made
the trip with Secretary of the Interior
Ken Salazar and me. I signed the first
legally binding international agreement
among the eight Arctic states, putting in
place plans for search-and-rescue
missions for ships in distress. That was
a start, hopefully paving the way for
future cooperation on climate change,
energy, and security.
The melting ice was opening up new
opportunities for shipping and oil and
gas exploration across the Arctic, setting
off a scramble for resources and
territorial rights. Some of the energy
reserves could be enormous. Russian
President Vladimir Putin had cast his
eyes on the region and directed his
military to return to a number of old
Soviet bases in the Arctic. In 2007, a
Russian submarine even deposited a
Russian flag on the floor of the ocean
near the North Pole. Russia’s moves
raised the prospect of an arms race in
the region and the “militarization” of
Arctic relations. Stephen Harper, the
Prime Minister of Canada, has said that
to “defend national sovereignty” in the
Arctic, his country needs “forces on the
ground, ships in the sea and proper
surveillance.” China, too, is eager to
gain influence in the region. It’s hungry
for energy and excited by the prospects
of new shipping routes that could cut the
travel time between ports in Shanghai
and Hong Kong and markets in Europe
by thousands of miles. China has
launched several Arctic research
expeditions, built its own research
center in Norway, expanded investments
in Nordic countries, signed a trade
agreement with Iceland, and gained
observer status at the Arctic Council.
Jonas and I discussed the need to
prevent this latter-day gold rush from
overwhelming the Arctic’s fragile
ecosystem and accelerating climate
change. Increased economic activity was
inevitable and could be conducted
responsibly, if we were careful. But
more ships, more drilling, and more
military forces in the region would only
accelerate the environmental damage.
Just imagine the impact of an oil spill in
the Arctic like the one that hit the Gulf of
Mexico in 2010. If we let the Arctic turn
into the Wild West, the health of the
planet and our own security would be at
risk.
In the future, I hope that the Arctic
Council is able to reach agreement on
how to protect and use the Arctic. This
challenge may not galvanize public
opinion today, but it’s one of the most
important long-term issues we face.

Despite a strong call to action from
President Obama in his second inaugural
address, a serious, comprehensive
response to climate change remains
stymied by entrenched political
opposition at home. The recession may
have helped cut our total emissions, but
it also made it harder to mobilize the
political will to drive more meaningful
change. When the economy is hurting and
people are looking for jobs, many other
concerns fade into the background. And
the old false choice between promoting
the economy and protecting the
environment surfaces once again. One
exception has been the rapid
transformation from coal to natural gas
in the generation of electricity. Burning
natural gas emits only about half the
greenhouse gases that coal does, so long
as methane is prevented from leaking
from the gas wells, although its
production carries other environmental
risks. To take full advantage of our large
resource of natural gas, states and the
federal government will need to provide
better regulations, more transparency,
and rigorous enforcement.
I wish we had achieved more to
combat climate change during the first
four years of the Obama Administration.
Losing the Congress set us back a lot
because the Republican majority, unlike
conservative parties in other countries,
has made denying climate change and
opposing even economically beneficial
responses to it a central part of its
platform. But we can’t get discouraged
by the size of the problem or the
stubbornness of the opposition. We have
to keep taking practical steps that
actually work. In our meeting in
Copenhagen, the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia told me that the world was
looking to the United States to lead the
way on climate change. I believe this is
both a responsibility we should accept
and an opportunity we should seize.
After all, we’re still the largest economy
and the second-largest emitter of carbon
dioxide. The more serious the effects of
climate change, the more important it
will be for us to lead. The crucial
innovations that will help meet this
challenge, whether new clean energy
technologies, carbon sequestration
techniques, or ways to increase our
energy efficiency, are most likely to
come from our scientists and
laboratories. And changing the way we
produce and conserve energy can make a
large contribution to our economy.
Despite their hard-line stance in
international settings, China’s leaders
are taking important steps at home to
invest in clean energy and begin
addressing their environmental
problems. Over the years we’ve seen
growing grassroots pressure from the
Chinese people on issues of pollution,
air quality, and clean water. In January
2013, in Beijing and more than two
dozen other cities in China the air
quality from pollution grew so bad—
twenty-five times greater in Beijing than
any U.S. city would consider a safe
level—that people referred to it as an
“airpocalypse.” Our embassy in Beijing
played an essential role in publicly
providing information about pollution,
including hourly updates via Twitter.
The situation grew so dire that the
Chinese leadership recognized pollution
as a threat to the country’s stability and
started to monitor it and publicly release
their own numbers on air quality.
In June 2013, President Obama and
President Xi signed an agreement to
work together on eliminating some
“super pollutants,” the
hydrofluorocarbons that come largely
from air conditioning units. This was the
first agreement between the United
States and China to do something
specific on climate change. If these steps
succeed, it may help to convince China
that concerted global action on climate
change is in its long-term interest. An
understanding between the United States
and China will be essential for a global
agreement.
The next big international milestone
will come in Paris in 2015, when the
process that began in Copenhagen will
hopefully culminate in a new legal
agreement on emissions and mitigation
that is applicable to every country in the
world. Reaching that goal won’t be easy,
as we’ve learned, but it does represent a
real opportunity for progress.
America’s ability to lead in this
setting hinges on what we ourselves are
willing to do at home. No country will
fall in line just because we tell them to.
They want to see us taking significant
steps of our own—and we should want
the same thing. The failure to pass a
comprehensive climate bill through the
Senate in 2009 made our negotiating job
at Copenhagen much harder. To succeed
in Paris, we need to be able to show real
results at home. President Obama’s June
2013 Climate Action Plan is an
important step in the right direction, and
despite Congressional gridlock, the
President is moving forward with strong
executive actions. Since 2008, we’ve
nearly doubled production of clean
renewable energy from wind, solar, and
geothermal sources; improved fuel
efficiency for vehicles; and for the first
time begun measuring greenhouse gas
emissions from our largest sources. In
2012, U.S. carbon emissions fell to the
lowest level in twenty years. But there’s
a lot more to do. Building a broad
national consensus on the urgency of the
climate threat and the imperative of a
bold and comprehensive response will
not be easy, but it is essential.
The most important voices to be heard
on this issue are those of the many
people whose lives and livelihoods are
most at risk from climate change: tribal
elders in Alaska watching their fishing
holes dry up and the land below their
villages erode away; the leaders of
island nations trying to raise the alarm
before their homes are submerged
forever; military planners and
intelligence analysts preparing for future
conflicts and crises caused by climate
change; and all those families,
businesses, and communities who have
been assaulted by extreme weather. At
the conference in Copenhagen in 2009
the most compelling pleas for action
came from the leaders of the small
island nations, confronting the loss of
their land to rising ocean levels. “If
things go business as usual,” one said,
“we will not live, we will die. Our
country will not exist.”
22

Jobs and Energy: A
Level Playing Field

Algeria is one of those complicated
countries that forces the United States to
balance our interests and values. It has
been an important ally in the fight against
al Qaeda and was a potential stabilizing
force in North Africa as Libya and Mali
descended into chaos. But it also has a
poor human rights record and a
relatively closed economy.
Both because we need to continue our
security cooperation and because it’s the
right thing to do, the United States sought
to encourage improvements in human
rights and a more open economy in
Algeria. When the government decided
to solicit foreign bids to build power
plants and modernize its energy sector, I
saw an opportunity for advancing
prosperity in Algeria and seizing an
opportunity for American business.
General Electric was competing for the
more than $2.5 billion contract. Too
often I had seen risk-averse U.S.
corporations avoid emerging or
challenging markets, while Asian and
European companies scooped up
contracts and profits. State-owned or controlled enterprises were especially
difficult competitors because they
played by their own rules, with
unlimited resources and little
compunction about violating
international norms on bribery and
corruption. With growth at home still too
slow and unemployment still too high,
we couldn’t afford to leave good
opportunities on the table or put up with
unfair competition. So GE’s move to
compete in Algeria represented a bold
step by a flagship American company,
with the potential to yield economic
benefits back home and strategic benefits
in North Africa.
In October 2012, I went back to
Algiers to urge the government to
continue political reforms, expand
security cooperation in Mali, and
consider the GE deal. President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika greeted me on a
red carpet outside the Mouradia Palace,
a sprawling white villa with Moorishstyle arches. Behind him rows of
Algerian cavalry stood at attention, in
their traditional red tunics and green
pants. After the seventy-five-year-old
Bouteflika walked me past the honor
guard into the palace, we spent three
hours together, in a wide-ranging
dialogue that touched on subjects ranging
from the effects of climate change to
threats from al Qaeda. I also asked about
GE and I left Algiers optimistic that the
company would be given a fair shot to
win the contract.
Less than a year later GE won the
contract to help build six natural gas
power plants, which are expected to
increase Algeria’s electricity-generating
capacity by about 70 percent. Over the
next few years GE will build generators
and giant turbines for these plants in
Schenectady, New York, and
Greenville, South Carolina, supporting
thousands of manufacturing jobs. As a
local union representative in
Schenectady told the Times-Union, “It
shows the world we are still No. 1 in
world-class power manufacturing.” To
me, it also reconfirmed an insight that
guided much of our work at the State
Department over the previous four
years: Because energy and economics
are increasingly at the heart of our
strategic challenges, they must also be at
the heart of American diplomacy.
When I became Secretary in 2009, I
focused on two big questions about the
global economy: Could we sustain and
create good jobs at home and help speed
our recovery by opening new markets
and boosting exports? And were we
going to let China and other relatively
closed markets continue to rewrite the
rules of the global economy in a way that
would surely disadvantage our workers
and companies? The answers would go
a long way toward determining whether
America would continue to lead the
world’s economy and whether we would
restore prosperity for our own people.
Traditionally trade, energy, and
international economics have not been
priorities for Secretaries of State. After
all, we have a U.S. Trade
Representative and Secretaries of
Commerce, Energy, and the Treasury.
But the global financial crisis made that
division impractical. It was clearer than
ever that America’s economic strength
and our global leadership were a
package deal. We would not have one
without the other.
I called our efforts “economic
statecraft,” and urged our diplomats
around the world to make it a priority.
We had diplomatic posts in more than
270 cities around the world, many of
them with resident economic officers. I
wanted to use these resources to create
new opportunities for growth and shared
prosperity. Over the next four years we
stood up to protectionism and
mercantilism, went to bat for American
companies and workers, sought to attract
more direct foreign investment into our
country, and worked to capitalize on the
energy revolution that was helping to
drive our domestic recovery and reshape
the global strategic landscape.

America had worked for decades to
create a global economy of free and fair,
open and transparent trade and
investment, with clear rules of the road
that would benefit everyone.
The current global trading system
doesn’t fully meet that standard. It is
distorted not only by barriers to entry in
developing and emerging economies, but
by the power of special interests in
developed countries, including the
United States. Just as it isn’t fair for
other countries to keep our products and
services out of their markets, or to
demand bribes or steal our intellectual
property in return for access to them, it
isn’t fair to use our patent laws to deny
life-saving generic medicines to poor
people in low-income countries. (The
work of the Clinton Health Access
Initiative to lower prices and increase
volume for AIDS medicines proves that
there are ways to save lives and protect
legitimate economic interests.) To make
trade fairer as well as freer, developing
countries have to do a better job of
improving productivity, raising labor
conditions, and protecting the
environment. And in the United States
we have to do a better job of providing
good jobs to those who are displaced by
trade.
Currently the United States is
negotiating comprehensive agreements
with eleven countries in Asia and in
North and South America, and with the
European Union. We should be focused
on ending currency manipulation,
environmental destruction, and
miserable working conditions in
developing countries, as well as
harmonizing regulations with the EU.
And we should avoid some of the
provisions sought by business interests,
including our own, like giving them or
their investors the power to sue foreign
governments to weaken their
environmental and public health rules, as
Philip Morris is already trying to do in
Australia. The United States should be
advocating a level and fair playing field,
not special favors.
Despite all its problems, a more open
trading system has lifted more people
out of poverty in the last thirty-five years
than at any comparable time in history.
And there is less imbalance in our trade
with the countries we do have
agreements with, like Canada and
Mexico, than with those we don’t, like
China. Making an open system work
better will help more people than state
capitalism, petro capitalism, currency
manipulation, and corrupt deal making
ever will.
Meanwhile, I was determined to do
everything I could to help American
businesses and workers seize more of
the legitimate opportunities already
available. We faced strong headwinds
from countries that wanted a different
system altogether.
China had become the leading
exponent of an economic model called
“state capitalism,” in which state-owned
or state-supported companies used
public money to dominate markets and
advance strategic interests. State
capitalism, as well as a range of new
forms of protectionism involving
barriers behind borders—such as unfair
regulations, discrimination against
foreign companies, and forced
technology transfers—posed a growing
threat to the ability of American
businesses to compete in key markets.
These policies ran directly counter to the
values and principles we had worked to
embed in the global economy. We
believed an open, free, transparent, and
fair system with clear rules of the road
would benefit everyone.
Though China was the largest offender
when it came to new forms of
protectionism and state capitalism, it
was hardly alone. By 2011, sovereign
wealth investment funds, which are
owned and run by governments, often
with revenue from exports of oil and
natural gas, had grown to control roughly
12 percent of all investment worldwide.
Increasingly, state-owned and statesupported enterprises were operating not
just in their home markets but around the
globe, sometimes in secrecy, often
lacking the transparency and
accountability that shareholders and
regulations ensure. We were seeing
hybrid companies masquerading as
commercial actors that were actually
controlled by states and acting with
strategic consequences, such as Russia’s
Gazprom.
As a Senator I warned that China, a
member of the World Trade
Organization, “needs to be convinced to
play by the rules in the global
marketplace,” and I was concerned that
the Bush Administration’s laissez-faire
philosophy led them to take a hands-off
approach. In 2004, I was approached by
executives at a storied New York
company, Corning Glass, with a problem
that highlighted the challenges we faced.
Established in 1851, Corning, a glass
manufacturer headquartered in Corning,
New York, was famous for supplying the
scratch-resistant “gorilla glass” used by
more than thirty-three major brands of
smartphones, tablets, and notebooks,
including Apple’s iPhone. Corning also
produced advanced liquid crystal
displays in computer monitors and
televisions, as well as optical fiber and
cables for the communications industry,
clean filters for diesel engines, and a
wide range of other innovative products.
They spent more than $700 million a
year on research. Their technology and
products were so good that competitors
in China felt they needed an unfair
advantage to compete. So they asked
their friends in the Chinese government
to either block Corning from entering the
market altogether or slap their fiber
optics with absurdly high tariffs. There
were also blatant attempts to steal the
company’s intellectual property.
This wasn’t fair, and it was also a
threat to the future of a company that
employed thousands of New Yorkers. In
April 2004, I invited the Chinese
Ambassador to my Senate office and
sent a pointed letter to the Chinese
Minister of Trade. I also made every
attempt possible to enlist the Bush
Administration to back me up. After
failing to get much attention from the
White House, I raised the Corning matter
directly with President Bush at the
dedication of my husband’s Presidential
library in Little Rock, Arkansas. “This is
a great American company being
threatened,” I told him. “Your
administration needs to help me help
them.” President Bush agreed to look
into the problem, and he did. In
December China dropped the
discriminatory tariff. Allowed to
compete on a level playing field,
Corning’s business thrived.
Other American companies face
similar challenges. In October 2009,
new Chinese postal laws came into
effect requiring domestic operating
permits for express delivery service
companies. The move was widely seen
as a plan for the Chinese government to
expand its own express delivery service
by the state-controlled China Post. The
major American delivery companies,
FedEx and UPS, had been doing
business in China for years. Before
2009, FedEx had permission to operate
in fifty-eight locations there, and UPS in
thirty. Both companies feared that the
Chinese government would issue them
severely restrictive licenses. Our U.S.
Ambassadors in Beijing, first Jon
Huntsman and then Gary Locke (as a
former Commerce Secretary, Gary
understood exactly how important this
was), raised the issue with the Chinese
government, but to no avail. Fred Smith,
the CEO of FedEx, eventually called me
to ask for my help.
I brought the matter up directly with
Wang Qishan, the Vice Premier
responsible for the economy and
someone I had come to know and
respect. Secretary of Commerce John
Bryson and I followed up in a joint
letter. After our efforts the Chinese
informed FedEx that they had finally
granted licenses, but only to eight cities
in China, and just five for UPS. That was
a start, but nowhere near good enough. I
delivered another message to Vice
Premier Wang. Eventually the Chinese
pledged that over the course of a threeyear interim period, they would grant
permits for the remaining cities. The
embassy reported back that the Chinese
officials were surprised by the sustained
U.S. government response to the issue at
such a senior level. As of this writing,
both companies have been able to
maintain their operating status in China.
The Chinese have stood by their promise
to increase licenses, but both companies
remain concerned about the potential for
growth in the future.
I was prepared to keep fighting for
individual American companies, but
given the scope of the challenge, we
needed to think bigger. In the summer of
2011, I decided to make it clear that the
United States intended to stand up for a
fair global economic system. I headed to
Hong Kong, an island of entrepreneurial
capitalism attached to China’s still
evolving state-dominated economy.
Hong Kong seemed like the perfect
place to make the argument for a level
playing field and a common set of global
economic rules. I had first visited the
city in the 1980s, when I accompanied
Bill on a trade mission to promote
Arkansas’s businesses and exports. This
time I was trying to sell more than
soybeans. I was selling the American
model of free markets for free people. It
had taken a beating in the eyes of the
world during the financial crisis, and a
growing number of nations were giving a
fresh look to the Chinese model of state
capitalism and autocracy, which
continued to produce impressive
economic growth at home. In a speech at
the Shangri-La Hotel, in front of a large
crowd of business leaders from across
the region, I made my case.
“We must start with the most urgent
task before us: realigning our economies
in the wake of the global financial
crisis,” I said. “This means pursuing a
more balanced strategy for global
economic growth.” Developed nations
like the United States would need to
build more at home and sell more
abroad (which would create jobs and
jump-start our recovery and help
increase growth in the rest of the world),
while rapidly developing countries in
Asia and elsewhere that had
accumulated large savings would need
to buy more—and strengthen and update
their financial and trade policies to
ensure a more level economic playing
field and greater stability in global
markets.
I acknowledged the challenges faced
by developing economies that still had to
lift hundreds of millions of people out of
poverty. China often argued that this
imperative outweighed any obligation to
play by established international rules
for business, labor, and human rights
practices. But I countered that China and
other emerging economies had benefited
greatly from the international system the
United States had helped create,
including their membership in the World
Trade Organization, and now they
needed to take their share of
responsibility for upholding it. Besides,
that was actually the best way to ensure
continued growth and prosperity and to
help even more people climb out of
poverty and into the middle class in
developed and developing countries
alike.
After all, Malaysian manufacturers
wanted access to markets overseas as
much as American manufacturers did.
Indian firms wanted fair treatment when
they invested abroad, just as we did.
Chinese artists wanted to protect their
creations from piracy. Every society
seeking to develop a strong research and
technology sector needed intellectual
property protections because, without
them, innovation would entail higher risk
and bring fewer rewards. And I
explicitly rejected the idea that there
could be one set of rules for the major
industrialized economies like the United
States and another for emerging markets
like China. “Enough of the world’s
commerce takes place with developing
nations that leaving them out of the rulesbased system would render the system
unworkable,” I said. “And ultimately,
that would impoverish everyone.”
Unfortunately, much of the attention
that day was not on trade but on a drama
unfolding thousands of miles away, back
in Washington, one that threatened to
undermine my argument and the world’s
confidence in American economic
leadership.
In mid-May 2011, the U.S.
government had reached its debt ceiling,
and the President and Congress had only
a limited time to raise it or risk
defaulting on America’s debts, which
would have catastrophic consequences
for us and the global economy. Despite
the high stakes, this was a difficult issue
for many to understand. To many
Americans, it sounded like Congress
was debating whether to give itself
permission to spend a lot of money and
rack up new debts. But that wasn’t it at
all. The real question was whether
Congress would vote to pay debts it had
already run up in spending bills it had
already passed into law. The vast
majority of countries don’t require an
extra step like this, so it was also hard
for people around the world to
comprehend what was happening.
Some in Congress were actually
arguing that, for the first time in history,
we should refuse to pay our debts and let
our country default, despite all the
consequences for the global economy
and for America’s credibility and
leadership. From every continent,
foreign leaders were expressing grave
concerns. China, which had invested
more than a trillion dollars in U.S.
government securities, was particularly
nervous. The state-owned newspaper
Xinhua reflected the prevailing attitude
when it wrote: “Given the United States’
status as the world’s largest economy
and the issuer of the dominant
international reserve currency, such
political brinksmanship in Washington is
dangerously irresponsible.” When this
scenario played out a second time, in
2013, the Chinese went further. They
started talking about a “de-Americanized
world” and suggested it was time to look
for a different reserve currency besides
the dollar. Of course, because China
owned so much of our debt, they were in
a strong position to make that outcome
more likely.
When I arrived in Hong Kong, the
crisis had reached a fever pitch. I awoke
to the headline “US Debt Talks Down to
Wire as Parties Battle” in the local
English-language newspaper. At the
Hong Kong Government House, Chief
Executive Donald Tsang greeted me
with his customary smile and bow tie but
asked the questions that were on
everyone’s mind in Asia and around the
world: What is going on in Washington?
Could they still trust the U.S. economy? I
heard the same questions at a reception
with business leaders before my speech.
The answer I gave was, of course,
yes. I said that I was confident a deal
would be reached. Privately I crossed
my fingers and hoped it was true.
The entire experience was a reminder
of how closely the rest of the world
watches how we make decisions at
home and how central America’s
economic strength and political resolve
are to our global leadership. The full
faith and credit of the United States
should never be in doubt, and the
Secretary of State shouldn’t have to
publicly reassure people in other nations
that we’ll pay our debts. Period.
My toughest sell, however, was still
ahead. I drove across the bridge into
China’s Shenzhen Province, to meet with
my Chinese counterpart, State Councilor
Dai Bingguo. The Chinese were
following our political dysfunction with
a mix of bewilderment, concern, and
anticipation. Of course, they didn’t want
anything truly awful to happen because
they understood how interdependent our
economies had become. But the more
paralyzed the United States looked, the
better China would look to the world.
The Chinese could say to potential
partners, You can’t count on the
Americans, but you can always count on
us. Dai seemed to enjoy dwelling on
America’s fiscal woes, adopting a
somewhat sardonic tone about our
political gridlock. I wasn’t having any of
it. “We could spend the next six hours
talking about China’s domestic
challenges,” I countered. I left my
meeting with Dai even more convinced
that America had to avoid these selfinflicted wounds and get our own house
in order.
Despite the ongoing drama in
Washington, I used my speech in Hong
Kong to put down a marker about the
importance of following globally
accepted economic rules of the road. But
we needed to do more than talk. In his
2012 State of the Union address,
President Obama declared, “I will not
stand by when our competitors don’t
play by the rules.” The administration
was already bringing trade enforcement
cases against China at nearly twice the
rate of the Bush Administration. Now
there would be a special new Trade
Enforcement Unit to go after unfair
trading practices wherever they damage
our interests and the operation of free
markets. And when other nations
provided unfair financing for their
exports, the United States would offer
matching support to our firms.

A lot of good American jobs depend on
a level playing field with rules that are
clear, fair, and followed. On average,
every $1 billion of goods we export
supports between 5,000 and 5,400 jobs,
and those jobs pay between 13 and 18
percent more than non-export-related
jobs. In 2010 President Obama set a
target of doubling America’s exports
over five years. The administration
worked hard to improve and ratify trade
agreements with South Korea,
Colombia, and Panama that were
negotiated under President Bush, and
also launched new trade talks with many
of the nations of the Pacific Rim, as well
as with the EU.
I made export promotion a personal
mission. During my travels I often made
a pitch for an American business or
product, like GE in Algeria. For
example, in October 2009, I visited the
Boeing Design Center in Moscow
because Boeing had been trying to
secure a contract for new planes with the
Russians. I made the case that Boeing’s
jets set the global gold standard, and,
after I left, our embassy kept at it. In
2010, the Russians agreed to buy fifty
737s, for almost $4 billion, which
translated into thousands of American
jobs. And our efforts weren’t just on
behalf of big companies like Boeing or
GE—we also advocated for small and
medium-sized businesses across our
country trying to go global.
We got creative with initiatives like
Direct Line, which allowed our
Ambassadors to host phone calls or
video chats with American businesses
eager to break into new markets. The
U.S. Ambassador to Spain hosted a call
with thirty companies to discuss the
protection of intellectual property rights,
for instance, while our Ambassador to
Chile hosted one on renewable energy
opportunities there.
The State Department worked with the
Commerce Department as well as state
and local officials on a program called
SelectUSA, which President Obama
launched in June 2011, to attract more
foreign direct investment into our
country, which already supported more
than 5 million American jobs, including
2 million in manufacturing. The early
results were encouraging. In October
2013, President Obama highlighted 220
new jobs at an Austrian company’s autoparts plant in Cartersville, Georgia, and
a $600 million investment in Wichita,
Kansas, by the Canadian company
Bombardier.
One little-noticed but quite effective
tool was State’s aviation diplomacy.
During my four years, our experts
negotiated fifteen Open Skies
Agreements with nations all over the
world, bringing the total number to more
than a hundred. These agreements
opened new routes to U.S. air carriers.
According to independent estimates, the
direct connection between Memphis and
Amsterdam had a $120 million annual
impact on Tennessee’s economy and
supported more than 2,200 local jobs.
And when American Airlines started
flying direct to Madrid, it had a $100
million annual impact on the Dallas–Fort
Worth economy.
Since 2009, U.S. exports have
increased by 50 percent, which means
they’ve grown four times as fast as the
economy as a whole. All these sales
overseas have contributed about $700
billion to our total economic output and
are responsible for as much as a third of
our economic growth, supporting an
estimated 1.6 million private-sector
jobs. Though millions of Americans are
still out of work, these are meaningful
results.
Lowering barriers to access for
American companies was a big part of
our efforts. So was raising standards in
foreign markets on key issues like labor
rights, environmental protection, the
behavior of state-owned enterprises, and
intellectual property. Companies in the
United States already met these
standards, but those of many other
countries didn’t. We needed to level the
playing field and improve a lot of lives
around the world along the way. For too
long we’d seen companies closing
factories and leaving the United States
because they could do business more
cheaply in foreign countries where they
didn’t have to pay workers a living
wage or abide by U.S. rules on
pollution. Using diplomacy and trade
negotiations to raise standards abroad
could help change that calculus.
I felt particularly passionate about
improving working conditions around
the world. Over the years I met workers,
many of them women and even children,
who labored under atrocious conditions.
The most heartbreaking were victims of
human trafficking and forced labor that
amounts to modern-day slavery.
One day in July 2012, I met with a
number of women workers and activists
in Siem Reap, Cambodia, along with a
local representative of an organization
called the Solidarity Center, which is
funded in part by the AFL-CIO to
improve labor rights around the world.
The Cambodian women told me about
the many challenges they faced. Too
many employers used various forms of
coercion to force workers to stay on the
job for long hours, sometimes under
unsafe conditions. Many children were
still forced to tend fields, bake bricks,
and beg in the street. Children from rural
villages were being trafficked to cities
for sexual exploitation, often by foreign
men who might pay thousands of dollars
for virgin girls or to engage in other
forms of child sex tourism. Too many
police at every level were poorly
trained, if at all, to address these
problems or to protect survivors, and
too many public officials looked the
other way or, worse, profited from the
trade in human beings.
When I was in Siem Reap in 2010, I
visited a shelter and recovery center for
survivors of human trafficking run by a
courageous woman named Somaly Mam.
Trafficked into a brothel as a little girl,
she was raped and abused repeatedly
before finally escaping. In 1996, she
started a movement to rescue other
trafficked girls and support them as they
rebuilt their lives as she had. By 2010
her organization, funded in part by the
State Department, operated three
shelters across Cambodia that provided
safety and caring, along with
rehabilitation and vocational training, to
reintegrate survivors into society.
The girls I met were shockingly young
to be survivors of such terrible crimes,
but I saw how the love and nurturing
they were receiving had put light back in
their eyes. Some eagerly showed me
around, while others, who were shyer,
cautiously watched to see what the fuss
was about.
The crime of human trafficking is not
limited to Cambodia, or Southeast Asia.
Nearly 30 million people around the
world are in modern-day slavery of one
form or another, trapped in prostitution
or laboring in fields or factories or on
fishing boats. The United States is not
immune. In 2010 six “recruiters” were
indicted in Hawaii in the largest human
trafficking case ever charged in U.S.
history. They had coerced four hundred
Thai workers into farm labor by
confiscating their passports and
threatening to have them deported if they
complained.
As Secretary I appointed Lou
CdeBaca, a decorated former federal
prosecutor, to ramp up our global
antitrafficking efforts and to produce
reports on enforcement of antitrafficking
laws in 177 countries. I also asked Lou
to take a look at our own country,
something the Department had never
done before, because I thought it was
important to hold ourselves to the same
high standards we expected from others.
By law, the findings of those reports
triggered sanctions on countries failing
to make progress, so they became a
powerful diplomatic tool to encourage
concrete action.
In addition to trafficking, I was also
concerned about the unscrupulous, even
criminal employers, aided and abetted
by governments, who exploited their
workers, adults and children alike.
That’s one of the reasons I strongly
support the right of workers to organize
unions. After decades of struggle,
workers in America formed unions
strong enough to protect their rights and
secure such advances as the eight-hour
day and the minimum wage,
achievements that helped create and
sustain the American middle class.
In many countries around the world,
unions are still suppressed and workers
have few, if any, rights. This is bad for
them and it’s bad for American workers
too, because it creates unfair
competition that drives down wages for
everyone. Contrary to what some
governments and employers might think,
research shows that respecting workers’
rights leads to positive long-term
economic outcomes, including higher
levels of foreign direct investment.
Bringing more workers into the formal
economy and giving them fair
protections has positive ripple effects
for society. Inequality declines while
mobility increases. Taxes are paid.
Countries and communities are stronger
and better able to meet the expectations
and aspirations of their people. The
flipside is also true: Denying workers
their rights costs societies dearly in lost
productivity, innovation, and growth. It
undermines the rule of law and plants the
seeds of instability. And it’s bad for us
when foreign workers are too poor to
buy U.S. products.
Back in 1999, I explored some of
these questions in a speech at the
Sorbonne in Paris called “Globalization
into the Next Millennium.” Would
greater economic interdependence lead
to greater growth, stability, and
innovation for people around the world?
Or would it merely lead to a “race to the
bottom” of the economic ladder for
billions of people? Would it help to
expand opportunities for all citizens, or
reward only those of us already lucky
enough to have the skills to navigate the
Information Age? I suggested that it was
time to tackle “runaway global
capitalism’s worst effects” and “put a
human face on the global economy,
giving workers everywhere a stake in its
success, equipping them to reap its
rewards,” while providing “social
safety nets for the most vulnerable.” A
decade later the urgency of these
concerns had only heightened.
The State Department had long had a
bureau dedicated to democracy, human
rights, and labor, although the last part
sometimes was neglected. I wanted to
change that, and so did my Assistant
Secretary, Michael Posner, a human
rights activist who had helped found the
Fair Labor Association in the 1990s.
Under Mike’s leadership, the United
States stepped up its support for training
programs and workshops on
international labor standards for union
organizers, employers, and government
officials. We sponsored exchanges so
that labor academics from around the
world could learn from one another,
helped police and prosecutors go after
human trafficking and forced labor,
launched new diplomatic dialogues with
labor ministries, and signed agreements
with key countries like Vietnam and
China to provide technical assistance on
a range of labor issues, from mine safety
to social security.
In a town hall meeting in Dhaka,
Bangladesh, in May 2012, a labor
activist asked me what Bangladeshis
could do to improve rights and
conditions for workers, especially in
their country’s booming garment
industry. “We face all kinds of
obstructions with the police, goons,
thugs, and false allegations in court,” she
said. “And, in fact, one of our leaders,
Aminul Islam, was very brutally
murdered.”
This was an issue I had raised
forcefully with the Bangladeshi
government because I thought that the
case of the murdered trade union leader
was a real test for the country’s justice
system and the rule of law. In responding
to the question, I also turned to the
broader question of labor rights in a
developing economy:
There are strong forces that
oppose workers being organized.
We have this in my own country.
You go back to the 19th and the
early 20th century when labor
unions were just getting started,
there were goons, there were
thugs, there were killings, there
were riots, there were terrible
conditions. We passed laws at the
beginning of the 20th century
against child labor, against too
many hours for people to work,
but that took time. It took time to
develop a sense of political will to
address those issues. So you are
beginning that, and it’s a very
important struggle. . . . You are
doing very important work. Do not
be discouraged or intimidated.
You deserve to have the support of
your government and your society.
Then I explained some of the efforts we
were making around the world to stand
up for labor rights:
We have worked from Colombia to
Cambodia with the owners of
factories and other enterprises to
help them understand how they
can continue to make a very good
profit while treating their workers
right. . . . It’s a part of becoming a
middle-class country. Workers
deserve to have their labor
respected and fairly paid for.
Factory owners deserve to have
what they pay for, which is an
honest day’s work for the wages
that they pay. So there is a way to
accommodate those interests, and
we’ve seen it, and we can continue
to work with you to try to achieve
it.

One area where economics and
geopolitics come together most potently
—and where U.S. leadership is most
needed—is energy. Many of the
international challenges I dealt with over
my four years directly or indirectly
sprang from the world’s insatiable
hunger for energy and the shifting
dynamics created by new sources and
supplies coming online. Consider how
often energy played a role in the events
discussed in this book: the bitter dispute
over oil between Sudan and South
Sudan; competing claims in the South
and East China Seas that were as much
about control of resources under the
seafloor as commerce on the water’s
surface; the extensive effort to sanction
Iran’s oil exports; and, of course, the
international effort to cut greenhouse gas
emissions and address the challenge of
climate change.
Energy has always been an important
factor in international affairs, but a
number of developments have lent it new
significance in recent years: growing
economies in China, India, and other
emerging markets have generated huge
new demand; technological innovations
have opened up previously inaccessible
sources of oil and natural gas and made
renewables like wind and solar costeffective, creating new energy players to
compete with traditional petro-powers
like Russia and Saudi Arabia; and the
urgency of combatting climate change
has provided an incentive to develop
clean alternatives to fossil fuels and
improve efficiency.
The scramble for new energy
resources had the potential to lead to
more conflict or more cooperation
around the world. I thought that, with the
right strategy and tools, the United States
could help steer away from the former
and toward the latter. To help us do that
effectively, I created a bureau at the
State Department dedicated to energy
diplomacy, and asked Ambassador
Carlos Pascual to run it. He and his team
worked closely with the Department of
Energy, which had invaluable technical
expertise but less of a global reach.
Much of our energy diplomacy was
focused on five broad challenges.
First, we tried to help resolve
disputes between countries that either
laid claim to the same resources or had
to cooperate to utilize them. For
example, recall that South Sudan has
extensive oil reserves while its northern
neighbor Sudan does not. But Sudan
does have refining and shipping
facilities, which the South lacks. That
means the two countries, despite ongoing
hostility, need to work together.
Second, we worked to discourage the
use of energy supplies by one nation to
dominate or intimidate another. Russia’s
bullying of Ukraine and other European
countries with natural-gas price gouging
and supply cutoffs is a good example.
Third, we implemented sanctions
targeting Iran’s oil industry and worked
with partners around the world to
significantly reduce their imports of
Iranian crude oil and bring new supplies
online elsewhere.
Fourth, we promoted clean energy
sources like solar, wind, hydro,
geothermal, and natural gas (which isn’t
perfect but is cleaner than coal) that
could help us slow the effects of climate
change.
Fifth, we worked to prevent or
mitigate the so-called resource curse by
promoting transparency and
accountability in extractive industries,
and working with partner governments to
invest resource income responsibly and
avoid corruption. No country has
suffered more from the resource curse
than Nigeria. When I visited in 2009 and
2012, I stressed the urgency of Nigerians
tackling corruption and investing
revenues to improve millions of lives,
not swell personal fortunes. Nigeria
could be a G-20 member and an
influential global voice if it made the
hard choice to overcome the curse.
While we were pursuing all this work
abroad, there were also exciting
developments at home. American
innovation was at the forefront of
unlocking new energy supplies, whether
it was hard-to-reach oil and gas or
cutting-edge renewables. In 2013, the
United States reportedly surpassed both
Saudi Arabia and Russia to lead the
world in oil and gas production. And
electricity generation from wind and
solar more than doubled between 2009
and 2013.
The boom in domestic energy
production, especially in natural gas,
created major economic and strategic
opportunities for our country.
Expanded energy production created
tens of thousands of new jobs, from oil
rigs in North Dakota to wind turbine
factories in South Carolina. Cheap and
plentiful natural gas is helping drive
down costs for energy-intensive
manufacturers and giving the United
States a big competitive advantage over
places like Japan and Europe, where
energy prices remain much higher.
Researchers project that all the ripple
effects from our domestic energy
revolution could create up to 1.7 million
permanent jobs by 2020 and add
between 2 and 4 percent to our annual
gross domestic product. The shift to
natural gas is also helping lower carbon
emissions, because it’s cleaner than
coal. Greater domestic production is
reducing our dependence on foreign oil,
easing a major strategic burden, and
freeing up supplies elsewhere to help
our European allies lessen their
dependence on Russia.
There are legitimate climate change
concerns about the new extraction
practices and their impact on local
water, soil, and air supplies. Methane
leaks in the production and
transportation of natural gas are
particularly worrisome. So it’s crucial
that we put in place smart regulations
and enforce them, including not drilling
when the risks are too high.
If we approach this challenge
responsibly and make the right
investments in infrastructure, technology,
and environmental protection, America
can be the clean energy superpower for
the 21st century. That means creating a
positive environment for private-sector
innovation and risk-taking, with targeted
tax incentives, a commitment to research
and development, and policies that
encourage rather than undercut the
transition to clean, renewable sources of
energy. And it means investing in the
infrastructure of the future, including
next-generation power plants to produce
electricity more cleanly, smarter grids to
deliver it more effectively, and greener
buildings to use it more efficiently.
China and others are already racing
forward with big bets on renewables.
We cannot afford to cede leadership in
this area, especially since American
innovation holds the key to the next
generation of advances, and our capacity
to employ them at home and in our
hemisphere is almost limitless. Our
economic recovery, our efforts against
climate change, and our strategic
position in the world all will improve if
we can build a bridge to a clean energy
economy.

When grappling with some of these big
global trends in energy and economics, it
can be easy to forget how much they
affect the daily lives of individuals and
families around the world. One example
that really brought this home for me was
the simple but overlooked issue of
cookstoves. It combined concerns about
energy, the environment, economics, and
public health at a local level. And it
demonstrated how a creative, 21stcentury approach to development and
diplomacy could solve problems and
improve lives in unexpected ways.
If you’ve ever built a campfire or
tried to cook outdoors, you likely know
what it feels like when the wind changes
direction and black smoke fills your
lungs. It can bring tears to your eyes.
Now imagine if, instead of being a rare
outdoor activity, this was something you
experienced daily, inside your own
home. That’s what happens to 3 billion
people around the world who gather
every day around open fires or old and
inefficient stoves in small kitchens and
poorly ventilated houses. Women labor
over these hearths for hours, often with
their babies strapped to their back, and
they spend hours more gathering wood
for fuel. The food they prepare is
different on every continent, but the air
they breathe is the same: a toxic mix of
chemicals released by burning wood or
other solid fuel that can reach two
hundred times the amount the EPA
considers safe. As the women cook,
smoke fills their lungs, and the toxins
begin poisoning them and their children.
The black carbon, methane, and other
“super pollutants” released in this smoke
also contribute to climate change.
The results of daily exposure are
devastating. The World Health
Organization released data in March
2014 showing that household air
pollution was responsible for 4.3
million premature deaths in 2012, more
than double the number of deaths from
malaria and tuberculosis combined. That
makes this dirty smoke one of the worst
health risks in the developing world.
Although people have cooked over open
fires and dirty stoves for all of human
history, we now know that it is slowly
killing millions of people.
I asked Kris Balderston, my Special
Representative for Global Partnerships,
to lead an effort to tackle this under-theradar but deeply troubling and
consequential challenge. And in
September 2010, at the annual meeting
of the Clinton Global Initiative, I
launched the Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves with nineteen founding
partners from governments, business,
international institutions, academia, and
philanthropy. The Alliance decided to
pursue a market-based approach to
persuade companies to build clean,
efficient, and affordable stoves and
fuels. We set an ambitious goal: 100
million homes adopting new clean
stoves and fuels by 2020. We knew how
difficult this would be, from the
technical challenge of designing cheap,
safe, clean, and durable stoves to the
logistical challenge of distributing them
all over the world and the social
challenge of convincing consumers to
actually embrace them. But we hoped
that technological breakthroughs and
growing private-sector engagement
would allow us to succeed. On behalf of
the U.S. government, I announced a
pledge of $50 million to get the effort
going.
I was delighted by the speed and
scope of the progress we made around
the world. More than 8 million clean
cookstoves were distributed in 2012,
more than double the number in 2011
and ahead of projections toward the goal
of 100 million. By the end of 2013 the
Alliance had grown to include more than
eight hundred partners, and the U.S.
government had boosted its commitment
to $125 million.
Since leaving the State Department, I
have continued my work with the
Alliance as an Honorary Chair. There
are projects in Bangladesh, China,
Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and Uganda,
with efforts beginning in India and
Guatemala as well. The Alliance now
supports thirteen testing centers across
the world and has spearheaded new
global standards for cookstoves, giving
manufacturers, distributors, and buyers
guidelines for cleanliness, safety, and
efficiency standards. This is a crucial
step in building a viable market that will
deliver clean stoves to consumers who
will actually use them.

In difficult economic times, there is an
inherent tension between our desire to
lift other people around the world out of
poverty and into the middle class and
our need to protect our own hardpressed middle class. If global
economics were a zero-sum game, then
the rise of other markets and the growth
of other countries’ middle classes would
always come at our own expense. But it
doesn’t have to be. I believe our own
prosperity depends on having partners to
trade with and that our fortunes are
inextricably linked to those of the rest of
the world. And I am convinced that, as
long as the competition is fair, the more
people around the world who leave
poverty and join the middle class, the
better it will be for America.
This belief is rooted in my own
experiences growing up in a middleclass American family. After World War
II my dad, Hugh Rodham, opened a
small drapery fabric business. He
worked long hours and sometimes
employed day laborers. He often
enlisted my mother, my brothers, and me
to help with the silkscreen printing. My
parents believed in self-reliance and
hard work, and they made sure we kids
learned the value of a dollar and
appreciated the dignity of a job well
done.
I had my first paying job, other than
babysitting, when I was thirteen. I
worked for the Park Ridge Park District
three mornings a week supervising a
small park a few miles from my house.
Since Dad left for work early in our only
car, I had to walk to work, pulling a
wagon filled with balls, bats, jump
ropes, and other supplies back and forth.
From that year on, I always had summer
and holiday jobs. They helped pay my
college and law school costs. I was
grateful for the sacrifices my parents
made to give us opportunities they never
had, and Bill and I worked hard to pass
on to Chelsea many of these same
values, including a strong work ethic.
We felt this was particularly important
because she was growing up in such
unusual circumstances, first in a
Governor’s Mansion and then in the
White House. If my parents were alive
today, they’d be incredibly proud of
what a strong, principled, and
hardworking woman their granddaughter
has become. I know I am.
The world has changed a lot since I
was growing up, but the American
middle class remains the greatest
economic engine in history and the heart
of the American Dream. Its success is
rooted in the basic bargain that if you
work hard and play by the rules, you
will prosper; that if you innovate, if you
create and build, there is no limit on
what you can achieve. The middle class
has always been defined as much if not
more by the values and aspirations we
share as by the goods we purchase.
My time as Secretary of State
coincided with another great movement
of people into the middle class, but this
time it was happening in other countries,
as hundreds of millions climbed out of
poverty for the first time. The
projections are staggering. The global
middle class is expected to double in
size by 2035, to as many as 5 billion.
Two-thirds of all Chinese, more than 40
percent of all Indians, and half the
population of Brazil are all expected to
make it into the middle class. For the
first time in history most people on earth
are projected to be middle class rather
than poor by 2022.
This explosive growth raises
questions about our planet’s capacity to
sustain the level of consumption we’ve
come to identify with middle-class life,
especially when it comes to
automobiles, energy, and water. Climate
change, scarce resources, and local
pollution will force us to make dramatic
changes in patterns of production and
consumption. But if we do it well the
changes will create new jobs, new
businesses, and a better quality of life.
That means the rise of a global middle
class will be good for the world. It will
also be good for Americans. As wages
and incomes rise elsewhere, there’ll be
more people able to buy our goods and
services and less incentive for
companies to outsource our jobs. After
years of stagnant incomes and declining
social and economic mobility, we need
it.
Middle-class people around the
world are also more likely to share our
values. People everywhere typically
want the same things out of life: good
health, a decent job, a safe community,
and the chance to provide education and
opportunities to their children. They care
about dignity, equality of opportunity,
and due process before a fair judicial
system. When people manage to climb
into the middle class, and the immediate
needs of survival are less pressing, they
also tend to demand accountable
governance, efficient services, better
education, better health care, a clean
environment, and peace. And most of
them find the siren song of political
extremism less appealing. The global
middle class is a natural constituency for
America. It’s in our interest to see it
grow to include more people. We should
do everything we can to expand it at
home and around the world.
23

Haiti: Disaster and
Development

Four days after the earthquake in Haiti,
the only working runway at the airport in
Port-au-Prince was a jumble of activity.
As I walked down the stairs of our U.S.
Coast Guard C-130 cargo plane, I saw
pallets of supplies sitting untouched on
the tarmac. Planes with more emergency
relief circled overhead, waiting their
turn to land. The terminal itself was dark
and abandoned, glass from its shattered
windows strewn over the ground.
Traumatized families had taken refuge
on the airport grounds. Few Haitians
wanted to be indoors after the
earthquake, especially as aftershocks
continued, and there weren’t nearly
enough safe structures left in the country
to provide shelter for the more than 1
million people who lost their homes.
The 7.0-magnitude earthquake that
devastated Haiti on January 12, 2010
killed more than 230,000 people in a
country of 10 million and injured at least
300,000 more. Haiti was already the
poorest country in the Western
Hemisphere. Now it faced a staggering
humanitarian disaster. The need for both
immediate relief and long-term
reconstruction in Haiti would test our
aid capabilities and underscore the
importance of pioneering a new
approach to international development
for the 21st century.
By my side that day in Haiti was
Cheryl Mills, my indefatigable
Counselor and Chief of Staff, and Dr.
Raj Shah, the new head of the U.S.
Agency for International Development,
who had been sworn in only nine days
earlier. Cheryl had been spearheading a
review of our Haiti policy for the past
year, and when the earthquake struck,
she moved quickly to organize a massive
response across the U.S. government.
The State Department set up a twentyfour-hour-a-day crisis task force in the
Ops Center to stay on top of the flood of
information, requests for help, and offers
of assistance. Consular officers worked
around the clock to track down the
whereabouts of an estimated forty-five
thousand American citizens in Haiti and
responded to nearly 500,000 inquiries
from concerned friends and loved ones.
In the middle of that first night we
learned that the United Nations mission
in Haiti could not locate many of its
people. By the morning we learned that
the head of the UN mission, his principal
Deputy, and 101 other UN workers had
been killed, tragic losses for all of us
that dramatically reduced the ability of
the international community to muster
and coordinate a response to the
disaster.
Almost nobody was able to get into
Haiti in the first forty-eight hours. The
world was lining up to send aid, and
there was no system for getting it in or
distributing it once it arrived. The
destruction of Port-au-Prince’s port
forced shipping cargo to land more than
a hundred miles from the capital. The
road connecting the Dominican Republic
to Haiti was unnavigable, and other
roads across the country were
impassable. Only a small number of air
traffic controllers were left at the
damaged airport to manage the stream of
planes trying to deliver aid. It was a
mess.
When I got the news of the earthquake,
I was in Hawaii on my way to Asia for a
four-nation tour. As soon as I realized
the extent of the damage in Haiti, I
canceled the trip and headed back to
Washington to oversee relief efforts. A
number of Asian leaders were
disappointed, but they all understood the
urgency of the crisis, and many offered
to help in any way they could.
My head was full of memories dating
back to the first time I visited Haiti in
1975 as part of my honeymoon with Bill.
We experienced the tension between the
beauty of the place—the people, the
colors, the food, the art—and the
poverty and weakness of its institutions.
One of the most memorable experiences
of our trip was meeting a local voodoo
priest named Max Beauvoir.
Surprisingly he had studied at the City
College of New York and the Sorbonne
and had degrees in chemistry and biochemistry. He invited us to attend one of
his ceremonies. We saw Haitians
“seized with spirits” walk on hot coals,
bite the heads off live chickens, and
chew glass, spit out the shards, and not
bleed. At the end of the ceremony, the
people claimed the dark spirits had
departed.
We also saw the infamous security
forces of dictator “Baby Doc” Duvalier
strut around town with their mirror
sunglasses and automatic weapons. At
one point we saw Baby Doc himself
drive by, headed for his palace—the
same Presidential Palace that would fall
in the earthquake thirty-five years later.
When I got back to Washington after
the earthquake, I did not think it made
sense for me to go to Port-au-Prince
right away. After watching and
participating in emergency responses to
disasters over the years, I had learned
that one of the most important
responsibilities for public officials is to
avoid getting in the way of first
responders and rescue workers. We did
not want to tax Haiti’s already
overwhelmed systems or divert any of
its limited resources to support a high-
level visit when the priority was saving
as many lives as possible.
But two days after the earthquake
Cheryl spoke with Haiti’s President
René Préval, and he told her that the
only outsider that he trusted was me. “I
need Hillary,” he said. “I need her. And
no one else.” It was a reminder of how
important personal relationships can be,
even at the highest levels of diplomacy
and government.
On Saturday, January 16, I flew to
Puerto Rico, where a Coast Guard cargo
plane was waiting. It would have an
easier time than my 757 negotiating the
tricky landing at the damaged airport.
When we arrived in Port-au-Prince
Ambassador Ken Merten was waiting on
the tarmac.
His team at the embassy was doing
incredible work. One embassy nurse,
whose own home was destroyed,
worked nonstop for almost forty-eight
hours in a makeshift surgical trauma unit
to tend to seriously injured Americans
who showed up at the embassy seeking
help. A security officer, who, along with
members of the local guard force, went
searching for missing U.S. staff, found
two injured colleagues whose home had
fallen into a deep ravine. They carried
the couple by foot for six hours on a
makeshift gurney of ladders and garden
hoses until they reached the embassy
health unit.
But we suffered the loss of a number
of our embassy personnel and their
family members in Haiti, including
Victoria DeLong, a Cultural Affairs
Officer, and the wife and young children
of Andrew Wyllie, a decorated State
Department officer working with the
United Nations.
Our embassy team was working
closely with our staff back in
Washington to coordinate offers of
assistance. We successively tested an
innovative idea with Google and a
number of telecommunications
companies to collect and map requests
for emergency assistance—many of
which came in via an SMS text hotline—
which were then shared with rescue
teams on the ground.
Experts from across the U.S.
government were trying to get into Haiti
to help. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency swung into action,
sending doctors and public health
specialists from USAID, the Department
of Health and Human Services, and the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. The Federal Aviation
Administration sent a portable airport
control tower. Six search-and-rescue
teams made up of firefighters, police
officers, and engineers arrived from
California, Florida, New York, and
Virginia.
Next to Ambassador Merten on the
tarmac was Lieutenant General Ken
Keen, the Deputy Commander of U.S.
Southern Command, who had been in
Haiti on a planned visit when the
earthquake hit. They were standing on
the back porch of the Ambassador’s
residence when the ground started to
shake. Thankfully the residence was
largely undamaged and quickly became a
gathering place for embassy personnel
and Haitian government ministers, as
well as General Keen’s link back to U.S.
Southern Command in Miami as he
managed the military’s role.
Coast Guard officers were America’s
first boots on the ground. Eventually
more than twenty thousand U.S. civilian
and military personnel were directly
involved in search and rescue. They
restored airports and seaports, provided
life-saving health and medical service,
and met basic survival needs of the
Haitian people. The hospital ship USNS
Comfort treated hundreds of patients.
U.S. forces were welcomed and
cheered, and the people and their
government begged them not to leave.
Soldiers who served in Haiti between
multiple deployments to Iraq and
Afghanistan marveled at what a
refreshing change it was to feel so
wanted on foreign soil.
I saw another familiar face on the
runway: National Security Council Chief
of Staff Denis McDonough. He had
caught a military jet the day before to
help coordinate the complex relief
effort. He was literally soaked in sweat
in a polo shirt and khakis helping direct
traffic on the tarmac. His presence spoke
volumes about President Obama’s
personal commitment to Haiti. I had
stood with the President in the White
House two days before, when he
publicly pledged U.S. assistance. It was
the first time I ever saw President
Obama fighting to control his emotions.
My first order of business was to
confer with President Préval. We met in
a tent on the airport grounds.
Immediately I could see why Cheryl
thought it was so important that I come in
person. The destruction of Préval’s
country and the despair of his people
were etched on his face.
When the earthquake hit, Préval and
his wife were arriving at their private
home on a hillside. They watched their
house collapse in front of their eyes. His
office at the Presidential Palace was
also severely damaged. Préval couldn’t
find several of his ministers. Others
were severely injured or dead.
According to reports, 18 percent of
Haitian civil servants were killed in
Port-au-Prince, twenty-eight of the
twenty-nine government buildings were
destroyed, and members of the Cabinet
and legislators were missing or
confirmed dead. The situation was dire
and the government crippled.
When Préval first became President,
he had little political experience, but by
the time the quake hit he had become
adept in the deal-making culture of
Haitian politics. Still, he remained
naturally reserved and found it difficult,
even in the aftermath of the quake, to go
out among his people, who wanted to
see, touch, and talk to their leader.
Sitting in the tent with Préval, I tried
to gauge how he was holding up in the
face of such an overwhelming
catastrophe. We had urgent business to
conduct. The international relief effort
was choking on the bottleneck of the
airport. I proposed that the U.S. military
take over operations there as soon as
possible so that aid could begin flowing.
Préval wasn’t sure. Like all nations,
Haiti prized its sovereignty. And even in
an emergency, memories of previous
U.S. military interventions were not
easily dismissed. I assured him that our
troops would not be there to patrol the
streets or replace the UN forces working
to restore law and order. This was just
about getting the airport working again
and making sure planes landed and
supplies got distributed. Cheryl and our
team had prepared a legal agreement for
Préval to sign to give the U.S. military
temporary responsibility for the airport
and port. We walked through it line by
line. He recognized that Haiti needed all
the help it could get, but he also
understood that other countries and his
political opponents would criticize him
for “selling out” to the Americans. It
was one of many painful decisions he
would have to make in the days ahead.
Préval signed the agreement. He was
putting his personal trust in me as much
as in our country. He looked me in the
eye and said, “Hillary, I need you to be
Haiti for Haiti, because right now we
can’t do it.” I told Préval he could count
on America, and me. “We will be here
today, tomorrow and for the time ahead
as long as you want us.” Soon, with U.S.
help, the airport and seaport began
handling ten times more cargo, and aid
began reaching the people in Haiti who
needed it most.
At a second, larger meeting with
American and international aid groups,
Préval was less cooperative. He
disagreed sharply with the
recommendation to set up large camps to
shelter hundreds of thousands of
homeless Haitians. Presciently he
worried that if we built these camps,
Haiti would never get rid of them;
instead he asked that we give people
tents and tarps to stay in their own
neighborhoods. But the UN team argued
that it would be much harder to
distribute food and water if people were
dispersed. Camps would be much more
efficient, which is why they are part of
the standard international response to
disasters.
When we flew out of Port-au-Prince
later that day, we packed as many
people as we could onto the plane,
bringing two dozen Haitian Americans
to safety. Cheryl and I talked about all
the work that lay ahead. If we were
going to live up to my promise to Préval
—to be Haiti for Haiti—this wasn’t
going to be a quick relief effort. We had
to be ready for a long haul.

In times of emergency Americans’ first
instinct is to help. None of us who lived
through the dark days after 9/11 will
ever forget how people across the
country lined up to give blood. We saw
the same generosity on display after
Hurricane Katrina, when families in
Houston and other communities opened
their homes to displaced residents of
New Orleans, and after Superstorm
Sandy, when people came together to
help New Jersey and New York. When
the earthquake hit Haiti, the State
Department worked with a technology
company called mGive to enable
Americans to make donations directly to
the Red Cross via text message. The
effort raised more than $30 million in
less than three weeks from more than 3
million Americans. All told, Americans
wound up contributing $1 billion to help
Haitians after the quake.
For our country, stepping up in an
emergency is not just the right thing to
do. It’s also a smart strategic move. In
the aftermath of a disaster like the Asian
tsunami of 2004, when we provided
extensive humanitarian relief, we built
up valuable reservoirs of goodwill. In
Indonesia, the epicenter of tsunami
damage, about eight in ten people said
our emergency assistance improved their
view of the United States, and approval
of America more than doubled from an
Iraq-era low of 15 percent in 2003 to 38
percent in 2005. We saw the same
phenomenon in 2011, when the United
States rushed to provide assistance to
Japan after its earthquake, tsunami, and
nuclear meltdown known as the “triple
disaster.” Approval of America among
the Japanese soared from 66 percent all
the way to 85 percent, the highest among
any nation polled.
While many of us respond to urgent
needs in a crisis, it can often be harder
to summon the resolve to step up and
help when it comes to slow-motion
tragedies like poverty, hunger, and
disease rather than dramatic, attentiongrabbing emergencies like a tsunami.
Helping Haiti in the immediate aftermath
of a devastating earthquake was one
thing. But what about before the disaster,
when Haiti was plagued by the worst
poverty in the Americas? Or afterward,
when it faced years of difficult
rebuilding? What role should the United
States play in those efforts?
Americans have always been
charitable. In the early days of our
nation, Alexis de Tocqueville wrote
about the “habits of the heart” that made
our democracy possible and brought
frontier families together to raise barns
and sew quilts. My mother was one of
tens of thousands of Americans who sent
care packages to hungry families in
Europe after World War II. They
included staples like powdered milk,
bacon, chocolate, and SPAM. I am
continuously impressed by the
philanthropic spirit of the so-called
Millennial Generation. According to one
study, nearly three-quarters of all young
people in America volunteered for a
nonprofit organization of some kind in
2012.
Yet in debates about foreign aid,
especially long-term assistance rather
than short-term relief, many Americans
ask why we should be generous abroad
when there is so much work to do at
home in our own country. In a time of
tight budgets and big domestic
challenges, there are certainly hard
choices to make, but it’s helpful to be
clear about the facts. Polls show that
Americans significantly overestimate the
percentage of the federal budget
allocated to foreign aid. In November
2013, a Kaiser Family Foundation
survey found that, on average,
Americans believe that 28 percent of the
federal budget is spent on foreign
assistance, and more than 60 percent of
people say that’s too much. But in reality
we spend less than 1 percent of the
budget on foreign aid. When people
learn the truth, opposition is cut in half.
For decades, there has been a
philosophical tension in our approach to
international development. Should
foreign assistance be purely altruistic, to
help alleviate suffering wherever the
need is greatest, or is it intended as part
of our strategy to compete for hearts and
minds in extended ideological struggles
like the Cold War? Or to address the
despair and alienation that fuel current
radicalism and insurgency? President
Kennedy inspired a generation with his
call to service in “a struggle against the
common enemies of man: tyranny,
poverty, disease, and war itself,” as he
put it in his inaugural address. Yet he
never lost sight of the strategic context.
The idea for the Peace Corps began with
a brief campaign speech at 2:00 in the
morning at the University of Michigan in
October 1960. “How many of you who
are going to be doctors are willing to
spend your days in Ghana?” he asked the
crowd of students who had gathered in
the middle of the night to hear him speak.
“On your willingness to do that, not
merely to serve one year or two years in
the service, but on your willingness to
contribute part of your life to this
country, I think will depend the answer
whether a free society can compete.”
Even at 2 A.M. he was thinking about
how development might advance the
interests of the United States.
I’ve always thought the debate
between “aid for aid’s sake” and “aid
for strategic ends” was somewhat beside
the point. We need to do both. President
Obama and I were committed to
elevating development alongside
diplomacy and defense as core pillars of
American power, but inside the
administration we had many of these
same debates. As the White House began
putting together the first Presidential
Policy Directive on development, I
argued that we needed to draw a clear
link between our aid work and U.S.
national security. There were some
development professionals who
disagreed with that view, but the
President eventually accepted the
premise that natural disasters, poverty,
and disease in other countries were also
threats to U.S. strategic interests.
Haiti provided a prime example.
Helping the country get back on its feet
made sense for both humanitarian and
strategic reasons.
It was impossible not to be moved by
the plight of poor Haitians crowded into
the slums of Port-au-Prince, with few
economic or educational opportunities
and a series of corrupt, erratic, and
dictatorial governments. The Haitian
people have enormous talent and
perseverance, but they have had to
endure crushing poverty and
disappointment that would sap anyone’s
spirit. It should offend our conscience to
see children growing up so close to our
shores in such dire conditions.
And allowing a bastion of poverty,
drug trafficking, and political instability
to fester just seven hundred miles from
Florida—a little more than the distance
between Washington and Atlanta—is a
dangerous proposition. Every year
waves of refugees flee Haiti trying to
make it to the United States through
dangerous, shark-infested waters in
rickety boats and rafts. Compared to
military intervention and caring for
massive influxes of desperate refugees,
smart development assistance is a
bargain.
Even before the earthquake Haiti was
a priority for me. When I became
Secretary I asked Cheryl to take a fresh
look at our policy toward Haiti and
come up with a strategy for high-impact
economic development that would make
a difference in the lives of Haitians. I
also saw this as an opportunity to roadtest new approaches to development that
could be applied more broadly around
the world. After all, despite its
challenges, Haiti had many important
ingredients for success. It was not riven
by religious or sectarian divides. It
shares an island with a stable and
democratic country, the Dominican
Republic, and enjoys proximity to the
United States. It has big diaspora
communities in both the United States
and Canada. In short, Haiti has so much
going for it that other desperately poor
countries do not. If we could help
Haitians build on these advantages, they
could unlock great potential.
On the day the earthquake hit in
January 2010, Cheryl and her team were
finalizing a report to send to the White
House with a full set of
recommendations for Haiti, based on
priorities laid out by the Haitians
themselves. In the following weeks
everyone’s focus was on emergency
response. But soon it would be time to
think about long-term reconstruction and
development needs. So I told Cheryl to
dust off her report and get to work.

The challenge of “building back better,”
a phrase borrowed from my husband and
his work with President George H. W.
Bush after the Asian tsunami in 2004,
was daunting. The earthquake was a
disaster of unprecedented scope that
devastated Haiti’s economic center and
much of its productive infrastructure,
including the main port and airport,
power lines and substations, and
important trunk roads. Préval and his
Prime Minister, Jean-Max Bellerive,
recognized early on that Haiti required
bold economic development strategy that
would use recovery funds to create
lasting improvements in the lives of the
Haitian people. They had plenty of
prescriptions to choose from as Haiti
became the focal point of an ongoing
debate about development and the role
foreign aid can play in stimulating an
economy and improving a government.
What emerged was a development
strategy crafted by the Haitian
government that served as a guide for
reconstruction. Two of its central
tenants, to create economic opportunity
in regions called growth corridors
outside of congested Port-au-Prince and
to expand jobs in agriculture and light
manufacturing, became hallmarks of U.S.
assistance to Haiti.
The idea of letting the local
government set priorities and guide the
development was not exactly new. In his
celebrated speech launching the
Marshall Plan in 1947, George Marshall
argued that, “It would be neither fitting
nor efficacious for this Government to
undertake to draw up unilaterally a
program designed to place Europe on its
feet economically.” But Marshall’s
wisdom was often overlooked in the
following decades. Donor nations and
NGOs swooped into developing
countries with their own plans and
ideas. That impulse was understandable,
considering that local governments often
required expert advice, but it often led to
unintended consequences. Aid workers
in the field sometimes griped about the
“10,000-mile screw driver” with which
officials back in Washington or various
European capitals tried to micromanage
development efforts. Plans that sounded
good on the drawing board foundered
when applied in the real world, and
without local cooperation and buy-in
they didn’t translate.
Eventually the international
development community rediscovered
General Marshall’s guidance as the
principle of “country ownership,” and
we put it at the heart of our efforts in
Haiti and around the world. Country
ownership meant that for us, as much as
possible, we would work with local
officials and national ministries on the
needs they identified, to help them build
up their capacities and ensure a
coherent, unified approach with all
donors and organizations working
together toward those ends, rather than
in parallel or in competition. Our
development model could not be
formulaic. What works in Papua New
Guinea may not work in Peru. We had to
go case by case, country by country,
even village by village, to analyze
needs, assess opportunities, and tailor
investments and partnerships to
maximize our impact.
In Haiti and elsewhere, the primary
vehicle for our development work
would be USAID, an agency filled with
determined public servants but plagued
by years of dwindling resources and
drifting focus. In the 1990s Republicans
in Congress led by Senator Jesse Helms
of North Carolina called for abolishing
USAID altogether, arguing that the end
of the Cold War had removed the
strategic rationale for large-scale
foreign aid. Although Helms failed to
dismantle the agency, he was able to
drastically reduce its budget. Lost in the
debate were the real consequences of
pulling back and letting problems fester,
especially in places like Afghanistan.
When the United States walked away
after the Soviet withdrawal in 1989, we
created the space for the Taliban to
emerge. It was a costly error.
Interestingly, near the end of my
husband’s presidency Senator Helms
came to support Bill’s initiative to
forgive the debts of poor countries if
they put all the savings into health care,
education, or economic development. A
lot of the credit for that goes to Bono,
lead singer of U2, who proved
surprisingly persuasive with the
cantankerous Senator.
The Bush Administration had its own
take on development. The President’s
brand of “compassionate conservatism”
led him to invest in new development
programs outside of the existing
bureaucracy of USAID that have made
huge impacts, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa. The Millennium Challenge
Corporation provided generous
assistance to countries that met certain
standards and made reforms on
corruption and governance. President
Bush’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
built clinics, distributed drugs, and
saved lives all over Africa. It was an
amazing success.
When I became Secretary, rebuilding
and refocusing USAID was a top
priority. Without reforms, including
reducing our reliance on outside
contractors and increasing our ability to
innovate and execute, we were in danger
of being outpaced and outclassed by
other countries. Many European nations
had excellent development programs that
operated with more local involvement
and much lower overhead than typical
USAID efforts. China was spending huge
sums across the developing world. We
might not have thought highly of their
methods, which prioritized extracting
resources and bringing in their own
people rather than adding value,
increasing employment, and protecting
the environment, but there was no
disputing the scale and scope of their
engagement. As I found all over the
world, few people could identify
tangible symbols of American aid, but in
many nations people drove by a
Chinese-built stadium or on a
superhighway every day. We didn’t want
to emulate their approach or discount the
value of less visible projects, especially
ones that boosted crop yields and
prevented unnecessary deaths from
AIDS, TB, and malaria. But we did need
to keep improving and innovating so that
American development programs would
remain the most respected in the world.
To run USAID we found a thoughtful
and talented young man at the
Department of Agriculture, Dr. Rajiv
Shah. A trained doctor and health
economist who had run major programs
at the Gates Foundation, Raj soon
became a valued partner who shared our
commitment to reforming the agency and
elevating development within our
foreign policy.
The Obama Administration proposed
doubling foreign assistance by 2014, but
just as important, we planned to reform
how that money was spent, making sure
less was diverted to salaries and
overhead for for-profit contractors and
more went directly into programs on the
ground. I also wanted to reverse the
“brain drain” at USAID by increasing
the number of development
professionals and making it once again
an exciting and fulfilling place to work.
Raj and I agreed that to succeed,
USAID needed a new emphasis on
innovation, investment, and selfsufficiency. We began looking for new
ways to identify and support the best
development ideas from outside
government that could help us solve
problems around the world, especially
market-driven solutions that would
empower people and encourage
creativity. USAID launched “Grand
Challenges” competitions—contests to
support potentially game-changing
innovations. We also created a venture
capital–style fund to invest in big ideas
that could yield big results. The first
round of financing supported projects
like solar lighting in rural Uganda and
mobile health services in India. New
partnerships with the National Science
Foundation and the National Institutes of
Health began connecting American
scientists working on development
research with their counterparts around
the world. New science fellowships
allowed us to bring in more researchers,
engineers, and physicians to work with
USAID. In 2008 USAID spent roughly
$127 million to support research and
development. By 2014 that number was
up to $611 million.
Starting in 2011, Raj and I began
discussing a centerpiece project for this
innovation agenda: a state-of-the-art
development laboratory run by USAID
in partnership with research universities,
NGOs, the tech community, and U.S.
corporations. After three years of
preparation I was proud to join Raj in
early April 2014 to help launch what is
now called the U.S. Global
Development Lab. It will focus on
breakthrough solutions in water, health,
nutrition, energy, education, and climate
change, with the goal of helping 200
million people in the first five years.
Another major push was to find new
ways to stimulate private-sector
investment in developing countries.
American companies often struggle to
navigate the complicated array of U.S.
agencies involved in international
investment and trade, including the
Overseas Private Investment
Corporation (OPIC), the State
Department, USAID’s Development
Credit Authority, the Trade and
Development Agency, and the ExportImport Bank. Before I left office, I
presented President Obama with a plan
to build up OPIC into a full-scale
“development finance institution” that
could mobilize resources from across
the government to incentivize privatesector investments that would require no
additional taxpayer money. Other
countries have these kinds of institutions;
we should too. It’s good for American
businesses and for our partner countries.
While we improved our own
development capacities, it was also
crucial to help our partners improve
theirs. I was especially concerned about
corruption and poorly functioning tax
systems in developing countries we
were trying to help. Foreign aid is a hard
enough sell under the best of
circumstances, but it’s even more
difficult when elites in our partner
countries do everything they can to avoid
doing their fair share. That was
something I saw all over the world, and
it outraged me. When a country makes
reforms to improve tax collection,
expand transparency, and fight
corruption, it can ignite a virtuous cycle.
Taxpayers can see what they’re getting
for their money. Higher revenues allow
governments to provide better services
and pay decent wages to public
employees. All this, in turn, creates a
more attractive climate for both foreign
investors and development donors and
puts countries on the path toward selfsufficiency.

Helping rebuild Haiti would be a major
test for USAID and for how well we
could work with the Haitian government
while increasing its capacities, and
coordinating with all our international
partners, including governments, NGOs,
and institutions.
I began calling leaders around the
world right after the earthquake, starting
with the Foreign Ministers of France,
Brazil, Canada, and the Dominican
Republic. At a Haiti Donors Conference
in the spring of 2010 the United States
began the process of allocating more
than $3.5 billion in assistance, and we
encouraged other nations to follow our
example. All told, the conference
yielded in excess of $9 billion in
government pledges for long-term
development, in addition to substantial
commitments from the private sector.
Every country in our hemisphere got
involved. I was especially glad to see
that the Dominican Republic, which
shares the island of Hispaniola with
Haiti and has not always gotten along
with its neighbor, went above and
beyond to help. We even cooperated
with Cuba and Venezuela.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
had asked Bill to serve as his Special
Envoy to Haiti starting in May 2009, a
position he held until 2013. Then
President Obama asked him and former
President George W. Bush to lead a
postearthquake campaign that raised tens
of millions of dollars to start new
enterprises and increase employment. By
Bill’s side was Dr. Paul Farmer, a
cofounder of the organization Partners in
Health, whom Bill had asked to become
the UN Deputy Special Envoy in August
2009. Partners in Health started working
in Haiti in 1983, developing a unique
model of providing quality care with
limited resources to poor people in rural
areas. After the earthquake Paul and his
team managed to build a full-fledged
teaching hospital, Hôpital Universitaire
de Mirebalais, in Mirebalais, Haiti,
which is also the country’s largest solarpowered building.
The international relief and
reconstruction effort did a lot of good,
especially in the immediate aftermath of
the quake, but there were short-comings
in the efforts. Tens of thousands of relief
personnel set up camp in what felt like a
city under siege, and they were not
always well coordinated. Too many
well-meaning NGOs clogged the
pipelines. And, in a heartbreaking case
of unintended consequences, the cholera
epidemic that broke out in the fall of
2010 likely started with Nepalese
peacekeepers brought in by the UN.
USAID missed the mark in some
important places. The hospital referral
networks that one of our health experts
designed never materialized, largely due
to bureaucratic infighting. On energy, the
United States built a power plant and did
repairs, but our grander plans of energy
transformation have not yet come to
fruition.
There were, however, important
successes. As of January 2013, 7.4
million cubic meters of rubble had been
removed, one third of it by the U.S.
government. The number of Haitians
living in tent camps declined from a high
of 1.6 million to less than 200,000.
More than 300,000 people have found
safer housing thanks to USAID-funded
programs. And the cholera response and
vaccinations led by the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) helped drive
down the fatality rate of the cholera
epidemic from 9 percent to just over 1
percent. The United States supported
251 primary care and fifty-two
secondary care sites across Haiti, which
were estimated to reach the health care
needs of nearly 50 percent of the Haitian
population. We helped nearly ten
thousand farmers access improved seeds
and fertilizer and introduced new
techniques for better productivity. Rice
yields have more than doubled, and corn
yields have more than quadrupled.
The primary goal of our long-term
development strategy in Haiti was to
jump-start the economy, create jobs that
would pay people decent wages, and
reduce dependence on foreign assistance
over time. A center-piece of our efforts
was a $300 million industrial park at
Caracol, in the northern part of Haiti,
funded jointly by the State Department,
USAID, the Haitian government, and the
Inter-American Development Bank. It
quickly became a global effort, with a
Korean textile company, Sae-A Trading
Co., committing to build and run a
factory there to make T-shirts and other
items for Wal-Mart, Kohl’s, and Target.
When I visited for the October 2012
dedication, 1,050 Haitians already
worked there, with more expected to be
hired soon.
The Caracol project was in keeping
with a broader trend in our development
work around the world. We were
shifting our focus from aid to investment.
In the 1960s, when President Kennedy
created USAID, official development
assistance from countries like the United
States represented 70 percent of the
capital flows going into developing
countries. Since then, even though
countries have actually increased
development budgets, official
development assistance represents just
13 percent of those capital flows. That’s
mainly due to surging private investment
and trade in emerging markets, which is
good news. Given this shift, it made
sense to refocus our approach to
development so we can better harness
market forces and make smart publicsector investments that could catalyze
sustainable economic growth.
The United States was not abandoning
traditional aid, such as sacks of rice or
cases of medicines. That kind of
assistance is still a vital tool, especially
as part of an emergency response to a
disaster. But through investment we
sought to break the cycle of dependence
that aid can create by helping countries
to build their own institutions and their
own capacity to deliver essential
services. Aid chases need; investment
chases opportunity.
By the end of 2013, just over a year
after it opened, the industrial park at
Caracol was providing jobs to about
2,000 Haitians. There were six privatesector tenants, a million square feet of
leased factory and office space, and $26
million in annual exports. Over the
course of 2014 employment and exports
are on track to more than double as
manufacturers move into newly
completed factories. It also has a
modern waste water treatment facility, a
new electric grid providing reliable
power to surrounding towns for the first
time, as well as new housing, schools,
and health clinics.
In a 2013 column in the Financial
Times, Haiti’s Prime Minister Laurent
Lamothe noted that the majority of
Haitian families make around $700 a
year in subsistence agriculture and are
“never certain if heavy rains may wash
away their harvest.” So when Caracol
opened, fifty applications came in for
every job. “A single mother in Caracol
now earns an average annual salary of
$1,820 in her first ever wage job,”
Lamothe wrote. “If she advances to
become a line supervisor, she can earn
up to 50 per cent more. Previously
unemployed, she now can afford to send
her kids to school, pay for a mobile
phone and 24/7 electricity and have
some discretionary income to save. She
also benefits from paid vacation, health
care and one of the best worker rights
and worker safety regimes in the world.”
The day that the Caracol industrial
park was dedicated in October 2012
was an occasion for all of us who had
lived through Haiti’s darkest days to
celebrate a little good news, and no one
deserved applause more than Préval
himself. By that point, however, he had
been out of office for more than a year,
and his relationship with the new
President was far from warm.
The ill will dated back to the
November 2010 elections, just ten
months after the earthquake. The official
government tally and an independent
count by the Organization of American
States (OAS) reached different
conclusions about which candidates
should advance to a run-off. Many
Haitians, who had already endured so
much, were outraged that after all they
had endured their votes might not be
counted. The streets were soon full of
loud and unruly protests.
I decided to go to Haiti to meet with
Préval and the candidates to see if there
could be a peaceful resolution that
would avoid a crisis when there was so
much work still to be done in the
aftermath of the earthquake. Préval’s
preferred candidate, who the OAS said
had actually finished third, complained
that the international community was
pushing him out of the race. I insisted
that just wasn’t the case. After all, I
explained, people tried to push me out of
the race when I ran for President in
2008. Just as President Obama and I did,
he and the other two candidates had to
respect the voters’ preference. “Look,
I’ve run in elections,” I said. “I’ve won
two, and I’ve lost a big one. So I know
how it feels. But what’s more important
is that democracy be protected.” Unlike
a professional diplomat or an academic
or businessperson, I could put myself in
these candidates’ shoes. Elections can
be painful. Democracy is tough. In some
places you can be killed because you
want to run or you want to vote, or you
can be imprisoned and bankrupted. You
have to understand the risks that people
are taking, the worries they have, their
need to feel respected.
I met with Préval at his temporary
residence. We sat close together in plush
chairs, practically knee-to-knee. I started
talking about what it means to think not
just for tomorrow but for the long term. I
told him that this was his defining
moment. He was either going to be
remembered as a President no different
from all the Haitian leaders in history
who refused to listen to their people, or
he was going to be remembered as the
President who allowed democracy to
take root. He had to choose. “I’m talking
to you not only as your friend, but as
someone who loves my country and had
to do a lot of hard things, too,” I said.
“Do the hard thing, because the hard
thing is going to ultimately be in the best
interests of your country and in your best
interests, even though you won’t feel that
way until you’re able to step back and
look back.” He ended the meeting
saying, “Well, you’ve given me a lot to
think about. I’ll see what I can do.”
Shortly afterward Préval and all three
candidates accepted the OAS results.
The celebrated musician Michel
Martelly, widely known as “Sweet
Micky,” won the run-off, and Préval
retired. Usually the winner of an election
receives all the kudos. But in this case I
thought the hero of the hour was the man
who stepped down gracefully, even with
his country still reeling from an
unimaginable catastrophe. It was the first
time in Haitian history that any President
peacefully turned over power to
someone from an opposing party.
This was a very good sign for the
country’s future. The link between
sustainable development and good
governance is well established. That’s
why we put it at the heart of many of our
aid programs, most notably the
Millennium Challenge Corporation.
Haiti’s troubles on both fronts provided
a case in point. And we had a
counterexample readily available. Chile
was hit by an even more powerful
earthquake just a month after Haiti. But
unlike Haiti, Chile had the infrastructure,
resources, and governing institutions to
withstand such a devastating event and
respond quickly and effectively. To
“build back better” Haiti needed to do
more than clean up the rubble and get the
economy going again. It needed a strong
democracy and an accountable,
responsive government. A peaceful
transfer of power was a crucial first
step.
I was pleased to see Préval at the
Caracol ribbon-cutting event, but I
wondered how he and Martelly would
interact. To my surprise and delight,
Martelly acknowledged Préval and
brought him up onstage. Then they raised
their hands together in celebration. It
was a simple gesture, familiar to
Americans. But no two Presidents had
ever done that in Haiti—mainly because
there have been so few peaceful
transitions. It left me believing that Haiti
was, finally, despite all of the struggles,
on a better path.

In the international development
business, it’s easy to get frustrated and
fatalistic. But step back and look at the
sweep of history, and you realize just
how remarkable our country’s
contributions have been. Just in my
lifetime the United States has helped
eradicate smallpox and reduce polio and
malaria. We helped save millions of
lives through immunizations, life-saving
treatment for AIDS, and oral rehydration
therapy that greatly reduced the deaths of
infants and children. We helped educate
millions of young people and provided
significant support to once impoverished
countries that have flourished and
become generous donors themselves,
such as South Korea. Americans should
take pride in these achievements, which
have not only helped humanity but have
also helped our nation project our values
and strengthen our leadership in the
world.
24

21st-Century Statecraft:
Digital Diplomacy in a
Networked World

My government can go to hell!”
declared the young woman defiantly. I
had asked a pro-democracy activist from
Belarus if she was worried about facing
repercussions when she returned home
from TechCamp, a training session the
State Department organized in
neighboring Lithuania in June 2011. We
used these sessions to help civil society
groups from across the region learn how
to use technology to advance their work
and avoid persecution. Among the
countries to emerge from the old Soviet
Union, Belarus had one of the most
repressive regimes. But this woman
wasn’t afraid, she told me. She had
come to Lithuania to learn new skills
that would help her stay one step ahead
of the censors and secret police. I liked
her style.
There were about eighty other
activists from eighteen countries
crammed into a small room in Vilnius
for two eleven-hour days of training. For
the most part, they weren’t wide-eyed
idealists or technology evangelists.
These were dissidents and organizers
who were eager for any new tools that
would help them express their views,
organize, and circumvent censorship. A
team of experts from the State
Department was on hand to explain how
activists could protect their privacy and
anonymity online and thwart restrictive
government firewalls. We also had
executives from Twitter, Facebook,
Microsoft, and Skype.
Some of the activists talked about
how the Syrian regime of Bashar alAssad monitored the hashtags used by
opposition Twitter users and then
flooded the network with spam using the
same tags to thwart those trying to
follow the opposition. Was there
anything they could do to prevent that?
Others wanted help mapping
demonstrations and crackdowns in real
time during crises.
That evening I took members of my
delegation out to dinner at a local
restaurant in Vilnius. Over Lithuanian
beer, I asked how they thought the day
had gone. Alec Ross, my Senior Advisor
for Innovation, was particularly pleased.
In 2008, Alec had helped the Obama
campaign’s outreach to Silicon Valley
and the broader technology industry.
When I became Secretary, I asked him to
help me move the State Department into
the 21st century. I myself am not the most
tech-savvy person—although I surprised
my daughter and my staff by falling in
love with my iPad, which I now take
everywhere I travel—but I understood
that new technologies would reshape
how we practiced diplomacy and
development, just as they were changing
how people everywhere communicated,
worked, organized, and played.
We discussed how these tools were in
and of themselves value-neutral. They
could be forces for bad as easily as for
good, just as steel can be used to build
hospitals or tanks and nuclear power can
either energize a city or destroy it. We
had to act responsibly to maximize
technology’s benefits—while
minimizing the risks.
Technology was opening up new
avenues to help solve problems and
promote America’s interests and values.
We would focus on helping civil society
across the world harness mobile
technology and social media to hold
governments accountable, document
abuses, and empower marginalized
groups, including women and young
people. I’d seen firsthand how
innovations were lifting people out of
poverty and giving them more control
over their own lives. In Kenya farmers
saw their income grow by as much as 30
percent after they started using cell
phones for mobile banking technology
and learning how better to protect crops
from pests. In Bangladesh more than
300,000 people signed up to learn
English on their mobile phones. There
were nearly 4 billion cell phones in use
in the developing world, many of them in
the hands of farmers, market vendors,
rickshaw drivers, and others who’d
historically lacked access to education
and opportunity. Various studies have
found that a 10 percent increase in the
penetration rate for mobile phones in a
developing country can lead to an
increase in GDP per capita of between
0.6 and 1.2 percent. That translates to
billions of dollars and countless jobs.
However, we’d also seen the darker
side of the digital revolution. The same
qualities that made the internet a force
for unprecedented progress—in its
openness, its leveling effect, its reach
and speed—also enabled wrongdoing on
an unprecedented scale. It’s well known
that the internet is a source for nearly as
much misinformation as information, but
that’s just the beginning. Terrorists and
extremist groups use the internet to incite
hate, recruit members, and plot and carry
out attacks. Human traffickers lure new
victims into modern-day slavery. Child
pornographers exploit children. Hackers
break into financial institutions,
retailers, cell phone networks, and
personal email accounts. Criminal gangs
as well as nations are building offensive
cyber warfare and industrial espionage
capabilities. Critical infrastructure like
power grids and air traffic control
systems are increasingly vulnerable to
cyber attack.
Like other sensitive government
agencies, the State Department was
frequently the target of cyber attacks.
Department officials had to fend off
intrusions in their email and increasingly
sophisticated phishing attempts. When
we first arrived at State, these attempts
were similar to the fraudulent emails
many Americans experience at home on
their personal computers. Just as the
broken English of the infamous Nigerian
bank scam tips off most users, the often
sloppy early attempts to penetrate our
secure systems were easy to spot. But by
2012, the sophistication and fluency had
advanced considerably, with attackers
impersonating State Department officials
in an attempt to dupe their colleagues
into opening legitimate-looking
attachments.
When we traveled to sensitive places
like Russia, we often received warnings
from Department security officials to
leave our BlackBerrys, laptops—
anything that communicated with the
outside world—on the plane, with their
batteries removed to prevent foreign
intelligence services from compromising
them. Even in friendly settings we
conducted business under strict security
precautions, taking care where and how
we read secret material and used our
technology. One means of protecting
material was to read it inside an opaque
tent in a hotel room. In less wellequipped settings we were told to
improvise by reading sensitive material
with a blanket over our head. I felt like I
was ten years old again, reading
covertly by flashlight under the covers
after bedtime. On more than one
occasion I was cautioned not to speak
freely in my own hotel room. And it
wasn’t just U.S. government agencies
and officials who were targets.
American companies were also in the
crosshairs. I fielded calls from frustrated
CEOs complaining about aggressive
theft of intellectual property and trade
secrets, even breaches of their home
computers. To better focus our efforts
against this increasingly serious threat, I
appointed the Department’s first
Coordinator for Cyber Issues in
February 2011.
Around the world, some countries
began erecting electronic barriers to
prevent their people from using the
internet freely and fully. Censors
expunged words, names, and phrases
from search engine results. They cracked
down on citizens who engaged in
nonviolent political speech, and not just
during periods of unrest and mass
protest. One of the most prominent
examples was China, which, as of 2013,
was home to nearly 600 million internet
users but also some of the most
repressive limits on internet freedom.
The “Great Firewall” blocked foreign
websites and particular pages with
content perceived as threatening to the
Communist Party. Some reports estimate
that China employed as many as 100,000
censors to patrol the web. For ten
months starting in 2009 the government
even shut down the internet altogether in
the northwest province of Xinjiang after
riots among the ethnic Uighur
population.
That June, young Iranians used
websites and social media to get their
message out during protests after
disputed elections. The brutal shooting
of a twenty-six-year-old woman named
Neda Agha-Soltan by pro-government
paramilitary forces was captured on
grainy cell phone footage, uploaded to
the web, and shared far and wide via
Twitter and Facebook. Within hours
millions of people watched Neda die in
a pool of blood on a Tehran street. Time
magazine described it as “probably the
most widely witnessed death in human
history.” The video helped galvanize
global outrage on behalf of the
protesters.
Just five days earlier, State
Department officials who were tracking
the online efforts of the Iranian
opposition made a troubling discovery.
Twitter was planning to shut down its
global service for preplanned
maintenance at a time that would be the
middle of the day in Tehran. Jared
Cohen, a twenty-seven-year-old member
of our Policy Planning Staff, had
contacts at Twitter. In April he had
organized a trip to Baghdad for Jack
Dorsey, one of the cofounders of the
company, and other technology
executives. He quickly reached out to
alert Dorsey to the disruption the
shutdown could cause to Iranian
activists. As a result Twitter delayed its
maintenance until the middle of the
following night. In a blog post the
company noted the reason for the delay
was “the role Twitter is currently
playing as an important communication
tool in Iran.”
But the Iranian government also
proved adept at using these new
technological tools for its own purposes.
Their Revolutionary Guard stalked
protest leaders by tracking their online
profiles. When some Iranians living
overseas posted criticism of the regime,
their family members in Iran were
singled out for punishment. The
authorities eventually shut down the
internet and mobile networks altogether.
They also relied on more conventional
means of intimidation and terror. In the
face of the brutal crackdown, the
protests crumbled.
I was appalled by what happened in
Iran and by the persecution of online
activists in authoritarian states all over
the world. I turned to Dan Baer, our
Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Democracy, Human Rights and Labor
whom I had recruited from Georgetown,
where he was a professor researching
and teaching about the intersection
between ethics, economics, and human
rights. I asked Dan to work with Alec
and his team to find ways we could help.
They told me there were powerful
emerging technologies we could fund
that would help dissidents circumvent
government surveillance and censorship.
Our investments could play a pivotal
role in taking such tools to scale and
making them accessible to the activists
who needed them most. But there was a
catch: Criminals and hackers could also
use these tools to avoid detection. Our
own intelligence and law enforcement
agencies would have a hard time
keeping up. Could we be opening up a
Pandora’s box of illicit online activity?
Was it worth the risk to empower and
protect the activists?
I took those concerns seriously. The
implications for our national security
were real. It was not an easy call. But I
decided that striking a blow for free
expression and association around the
world was worth the risk. Criminals
would always find ways of exploiting
new technologies; that was no reason to
sit on our hands. I gave the green light to
move ahead. Our team got to work, and
by the time I visited Lithuania in 2011,
we had invested more than $45 million
in tools to help keep dissidents safe
online and trained more than five
thousand activists worldwide, who
turned around and trained thousands
more. We worked with designers to
create new apps and devices, such as a
panic button that a protester could press
on a phone that would signal to friends
that he or she was being arrested, while
simultaneously erasing all of their
personal contacts.

This technology agenda was part of
efforts to adapt the State Department and
U.S. foreign policy to the 21st century.
During the transition period before I
became Secretary, I read an essay in the
journal Foreign Affairs titled
“America’s Edge: Power in the
Networked Century” by Anne-Marie
Slaughter, the dean of the Woodrow
Wilson School of Public and
International Affairs at Princeton. Her
concept of networks keyed off the
architecture of the internet, but it was
bigger than that. It had to do with all the
ways people were organizing
themselves in the 21st century,
collaborating, communicating, trading,
even fighting. In this networked world,
she explained, diverse and cosmopolitan
societies would have significant
advantages over homogeneous and
closed societies. They’d be better
positioned to take advantage of
expanding commercial, cultural, and
technological networks and capitalize on
the opportunities presented by global
interdependence. This was good news,
she argued, for the United States, with
our multicultural, creative,
hyperconnected population.
In 2009, more than 55 million
Americans were immigrants or the
children of immigrants. These first- or
second-generation Americans were
valuable links back to their home
countries and also significant
contributors to our own country’s
economic, cultural, and political life.
Immigration helped keep the U.S.
population young and dynamic at a time
when many of our partners and
competitors were aging. Russia, in
particular, faced what President Putin
himself has called a “demographic
crisis.” Even China, because of its “One
Child Policy,” was headed toward a
demographic cliff. I only wish that the
bipartisan bill passed in the Senate in
2013 reforming our immigration laws
could pass the House.
While I maintained a healthy respect
for traditional forms of power, I agreed
with Anne-Marie’s analysis of
America’s comparative advantage in a
networked world. Here was an answer
to all the hand-wringing about decline
that was rooted in both America’s oldest
traditions and our newest innovations. I
asked Anne-Marie to take a leave from
Princeton and join me at the State
Department as Director of Policy
Planning, our internal think tank. She
also helped lead a top-to-bottom review
of the State Department and USAID that
we called the Quadrennial Diplomacy
and Development Review. It was
inspired by the Pentagon’s Quadrennial
Defense Review, which I became
familiar with as a member of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, and it
aimed to map out exactly how we would
put smart power into practice and use
what I started calling “21st-Century
Statecraft.” This included harnessing
new technologies, public-private
partnerships, diaspora networks, and
other new tools, and it soon carried us
into fields beyond traditional diplomacy,
especially energy and economics.
The State Department’s Bureau of
Public Affairs established a digital
division to amplify our messaging across
a wide range of platforms, including
Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, Tumblr, and
Google+. By 2013 more than 2.6 million
Twitter users followed 301 official
feeds in eleven languages, including
Arabic, Chinese, Farsi, Russian,
Turkish, and Urdu. I encouraged our
diplomats at embassies around the world
to develop their own Facebook pages
and Twitter accounts, to go on local TV,
and to engage in every other way they
could. Just as important, I wanted them
to listen to what people in their countries
were saying, including on social media.
In an era in which security concerns
often limited contact with foreign
citizens, social media offered a way to
hear from the people directly, even in
relatively closed societies. More than 2
billion people were now online, nearly a
third of humankind. The internet had
become the public space of the 21st
century, the world’s town square,
classroom, marketplace, and
coffeehouse, so America’s diplomats
needed to be there, too.
When Mike McFaul, a professor of
political science at Stanford and a
Russia expert at the National Security
Council, was preparing to move to
Moscow as our new Ambassador, I told
him that he’d have to find creative ways
to get around government obstacles and
communicate directly with the Russian
people. “Mike, remember these three
things,” I said, “be strong, engage
beyond the elites, and don’t be afraid to
use every technology you can to reach
more people.” Mike soon found himself
harassed and vilified by the Kremlincontrolled media. I made a point of
calling him on an open line one night
and, speaking very clearly so all the
eavesdropping Russian spies could hear,
I told him what a good job he was doing.
Mike became an avid user of social
media, eventually attracting more than
seventy thousand followers on Twitter
and becoming one of Russia’s ten most
influential online voices, based on
numbers of mentions by other users and
readership. Many Russians knew him
primarily as @McFaul, and they were
intrigued by his surprising candor and
willingness to mix it up with all comers.
In between explaining U.S. policies and
shining a spotlight on some of the
Kremlin’s abuses, Mike posted a steady
diet of personal thoughts and photos.
Russians got to see the U.S. Ambassador
as a human being, enjoying the Bolshoi
Ballet, showing visiting relatives around
Red Square, and recovering from a
broken finger injured in a basketball
game. In one official meeting not long
after that incident, Prime Minister
Dmitry Medvedev asked about Mike’s
hand. When he began to tell the story
behind the injury, Medvedev just waved
him off. “I know all about it,” he said. “I
read about it on the internet.”
Early in his tenure Mike got into a
heated back-and-forth on Twitter with
the Russian Foreign Ministry. The
Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt,
who has more than 250,000 followers,
chimed in with a tweet of his own: “I
see that Russia MFA [Ministry of
Foreign Affairs] has launched a twitterwar against US Ambassador @McFaul,”
he wrote. “That’s the new world—
followers instead of nukes. Better.” I
think Mike would be the first to agree.

If the hyperconnectivity of the networked
world played to America’s strengths and
offered opportunities to exercise smart
power to advance our interests, it also
presented significant new challenges to
our security and our values.
This became painfully apparent in
November 2010, when the online
organization WikiLeaks and several
media outlets around the world began
publishing the first of more than 250,000
stolen State Department cables, many of
which contained sensitive observations
and intelligence from our diplomats in
the field.
A junior military intelligence officer
stationed in Iraq, Private Bradley
Manning, downloaded the secret cables
from a Department of Defense computer
and gave them to WikiLeaks and its
Australian leader, Julian Assange. Some
celebrated Manning and Assange as
champions of transparency who were
carrying on a noble tradition of exposing
government wrongdoing, comparing
them to Daniel Ellsberg’s leaking of the
Pentagon Papers during the Vietnam
War. I didn’t see it that way. As I said at
the time, people of good faith understand
the need for sensitive diplomatic
communications, to protect both the
national interest and the global common
interest. Every country, including the
United States, must be able to have
candid conversations about the people
and nations with whom they deal. And
the thousands of stolen cables generally
showed America’s diplomats doing their
jobs well, often in difficult
circumstances.
The cables also provided intriguing
color. For instance, one discussed a
diplomat’s meeting with a Central Asian
Minister who showed up drunk to a
meeting, “slouching back in his chair and
slurring all kinds of Russian
participles,” while another described the
scene at a wedding in Dagestan, Russia,
where guests threw $100 bills at child
dancers as a “microcosm of the social
and political relations of the North
Caucasus.” Diplomats often provided
insight into world leaders, such as one
cable on the Zimbabwean despot Robert
Mugabe that noted “his deep ignorance
on economic issues (coupled with the
belief that his 18 doctorates give him the
authority to suspend the laws of
economics).”
The publication of these reports had
the unintended consequence of showing
how hard our Foreign Service officers
were working, and what keen observers
and talented writers many of them were.
But some of the unvarnished comments
also damaged relationships our
diplomats had carefully built over many
years. Our diplomats routinely reported
on conversations with human rights
activists and dissidents, business
leaders, even officials of foreign
governments who could face persecution
and retribution if their names became
public.
In the immediate aftermath of the leaks
I condemned the illegal disclosure of
classified information. “It puts people’s
lives in danger, threatens our national
security, and undermines our efforts to
work with other countries to solve
shared problems,” I said. Then I turned
to face the diplomatic fallout from
aggrieved allies and outraged partners.
I asked Under Secretary of State for
Management Pat Kennedy to set up a
task force to analyze the leaks cable by
cable and determine exactly what
information was compromised and the
consequences of those disclosures to our
interests, our personnel, and our
partners. We rushed to develop a
process to identify at-risk sources and, if
needed, help them get to safety.
On the night before Thanksgiving
2010, I started making what would be
dozens of calls from my house in
Chappaqua. First up was my friend
Kevin Rudd, the Australian Foreign
Minister and former Prime Minister. We
began with a discussion of our usual
topics of interest, led by North Korea.
“The other point I want to raise is
WikiLeaks,” I told him. Our
Ambassador to Australia had already
briefed Rudd that some of our
confidential discussions about the
region, including China’s activities,
might have been compromised. In
response the Australian government had
established their own task force to deal
with the situation. “It could be a real
problem,” he said. “It’s a dreadful
fallout,” I agreed. “We deeply regret it
and feel blind-sided.” I promised to do
all we could to help with the damage
control.
It would be a long Thanksgiving
holiday, working the phones and offering
apologies. Over the coming days I spoke
with many Foreign Ministers, one Prime
Minister, and one President. These calls
covered other issues as well, but in
every conversation I explained the
impending release of the secret cables
and asked for their understanding. Some
were angry and hurt; others saw an
opportunity to gain leverage with the
United States and tried to exploit it. But
most were gracious. “I appreciate that
you called yourself,” said German
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle.
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang was
consolatory, saying, “I can’t predict the
reaction of the public, but it’s important
for both sides to deepen mutual trust.
That’s the magic word for the ChinaU.S. bilateral relationship.” One leader
even joked, “You should see what we
say about you.”
The in-person conversations were
harder. In the first week of December I
attended a summit of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in Astana, Kazakhstan, along with many
other world leaders. Silvio Berlusconi,
the Italian Prime Minister whose antics
described in a number of leaked cables
were now being ridiculed on the front
pages of Italian newspapers, was
especially upset. “Why are you saying
these things about me?” he asked when
we sat down together. “America has no
better friend,” he insisted. “You know
me, I know your family.” He launched
into an impassioned story about how his
father used to take him to the graveyards
of American soldiers who had sacrificed
on behalf of Italy. “I’ve never forgotten
it,” he said. Berlusconi was no stranger
to bad publicity, as bulging files of
scandalous press clippings could attest.
But the way he was regarded by his
peers, and by the United States in
particular, mattered a great deal to him.
And this was embarrassing.
I apologized, yet again. No one
wished these words had stayed secret
more than I did. Understandably that
wasn’t enough to assuage him. He asked
me to stand with him in front of the
cameras and offer a strong statement
about the importance of the U.S.-Italian
relationship, which I did. For all of
Berlusconi’s foibles, he genuinely loved
America. Italy was also a key NATO
ally whose support we needed around
the world, including in the upcoming
military campaign in Libya. So I did
everything I could to reestablish a
measure of trust and respect.
Eventually my team and I reached
nearly every leader mentioned
prominently in a secret cable. Our fullcourt press seemed to minimize the
lasting harm. And in some cases the
honesty of our apology may even have
added new depth to some relationships.
Others were beyond repair.
In Libya, Ambassador Gene Cretz’s
searing reports on Colonel Muammar
Qaddafi made him persona non grata in
Tripoli. He was even threatened by
some of Qaddafi’s thugs, prompting me
to recall him to the United States for his
own safety. In neighboring Tunisia it
was the dictator who had to flee. The
publication of secret U.S. reports about
the corruption of the regime helped fuel
growing popular frustration that
eventually blossomed into a revolution
that chased Ben Ali from office.
In the end the diplomatic fallout from
WikiLeaks was bad, but not crippling;
however, it did foreshadow another,
much more serious breach of a far
different nature, which occurred after I
left office. Edward Snowden, a
contractor at the National Security
Agency (NSA), which is chiefly
responsible for monitoring foreign
communications, stole a massive batch
of highly secret files and passed them to
journalists. Snowden fled first to Hong
Kong and then to Russia, which granted
him asylum. His leaks revealed some of
America’s most sensitive classified
intelligence programs. There was
outrage around the world that the United
States allegedly was monitoring the
personal cell phone calls of partners
such as German Chancellor Angela
Merkel and Brazilian President Dilma
Rousseff. There was also concern that
terrorists and criminals would change
their own communications practices now
that they knew more about the sources
and methods used by the U.S.
intelligence community.
Most of the attention back home,
however, focused on how various NSA
data collection programs might affect
American citizens. In particular, scrutiny
focused on the bulk collection of
telephone records, not the content of the
conversations or the identities of callers
but a database of phone numbers, and the
time and duration of calls, that could be
examined if there was a reasonable
suspicion that a particular number was
associated with terrorism. President
Obama has since called on Congress to
implement a number of reforms so the
government will no longer keep such
data.
While continuing to defend the need
for foreign surveillance and intelligence
operations, the President welcomed a
public debate about how to balance
security, liberty, and privacy a dozen
years after 9/11. It’s hard to imagine
similar conversations taking place in
Russia or China. Ironically, just a few
weeks before the Snowden story hit, the
President had given a major speech
about national security policy in which
he said, “With a decade of experience
now to draw from, this is the moment to
ask ourselves hard questions—about the
nature of today’s threats and how we
should confront them. . . . The choices
we make about war can impact—in
sometimes unintended ways—the
openness and freedom on which our way
of life depends.”
Living in the public eye for so many
years has given me a deep appreciation
of privacy and the need to protect it. And
although the technologies at issue are
new, the challenge of balancing liberty
and security is not. Way back in 1755
Benjamin Franklin wrote, “Those who
would give up essential Liberty, to
purchase a little temporary Safety,
deserve neither Liberty nor Safety.”
With liberty and security, it’s not that the
more you have of one, the less you have
of the other. In fact I believe they make
each other possible. Without security,
liberty is fragile. Without liberty,
security is oppressive. The challenge is
finding the proper measure: enough
security to safeguard our freedoms, but
not so much (or so little) as to endanger
them.
As Secretary of State I focused on
protecting privacy, security, and liberty
on the internet. In January 2010 Google
announced that it had discovered
Chinese authorities trying to break into
the Gmail accounts of dissidents. The
company said it would respond by
rerouting Chinese traffic to its Hong
Kong servers outside the “Great
Firewall.” The government in Beijing
reacted with anger. Suddenly we were in
the middle of a whole new kind of
international incident.
For some time I had been working on
a speech staking out America’s
commitment to internet freedom; now it
seemed more important than ever to
sound the alarm about online repression.
On January 21, 2010, I went to the
Newseum, a high-tech Washington
museum on the history and future of
journalism, and made the case for the
“freedom to connect.” I argued that the
same rights we cherished in our homes
and public squares—to assemble, to
speak, to innovate, to advocate—existed
online. For Americans, this idea was
rooted in the First Amendment, whose
words were carved in fifty tons of
Tennessee marble on the front of the
Newseum. But the freedom to connect
was not just an American value. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
confirms that all people everywhere
have the right “to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers.”
I wanted to put nations like China,
Russia, and Iran on notice that the United
States would promote and defend an
internet where people’s rights are
protected and that is open to innovation,
interoperable all over the world, secure
enough to hold people’s trust, and
reliable enough to support their work.
We would oppose attempts to restrict
access or to rewrite the international
rules governing the structure of the
internet, and would support activists and
innovators trying to subvert repressive
firewalls. Some of these countries
wanted to replace the multi-stakeholder
approach to internet governance
established in the 1990s, which brings
together governments, the private sector,
foundations, and citizens, and supports
the free flow of information within a
single global network, and instead
centralize control in the hands of
governments alone. They wanted each
government to be able to make its own
rules, creating national barriers in
cyberspace. This approach would be
disastrous for internet freedom and
commerce. I directed our diplomats to
push back against these attempts in every
forum, no matter how small.
The speech caused a stir, especially
online. Human Rights Watch called it
“groundbreaking.” I certainly hoped that
we had begun a conversation that would
change how people thought about
freedom on the internet. Most of all, I
wanted to make sure that the United
States was leading the way on the
frontiers of human rights in the 21st
century, just as we had in the 20th.
25

Human Rights:
Unfinished Business

When I was growing up in Park Ridge,
Illinois, I attended Sunday school at our
Methodist church every week. My
parents were both people of faith, but
they expressed it in different ways, and I
sometimes struggled to reconcile my
father’s insistence on self-reliance and
my mother’s concerns about social
justice. In 1961 a dynamic new youth
minister named Don Jones arrived at our
church, and he helped me better
understand the role I wanted faith to play
in my own life. He taught me to embrace
“faith in action” and to open my eyes to
injustice in the wider world beyond my
sheltered middle-class community. He
gave me lots of books to read, and took
our youth group to visit black and
Hispanic churches in Chicago’s inner
city. We found a lot in common with the
girls and boys in those church
basements, despite our very different life
experiences. It was in those discussions
that I first became interested in learning
more about the Civil Rights Movement.
For me and my classmates, Rosa Parks
and Dr. Martin Luther King were names
we occasionally saw in a newspaper
headline or overheard while our parents
watched the nightly news. For many of
the kids I met through those church trips,
however, they were sources of hope and
inspiration.
One day Don announced that he
wanted to take us to hear Dr. King speak
in Chicago. It wasn’t hard to persuade
my parents to give me permission to go,
but some of my friends’ parents thought
Dr. King was a “rabble-rouser” and
wouldn’t let their kids attend. I was
excited but unsure of what to expect.
When we got to Orchestra Hall and Dr.
King began to speak, I was transfixed.
The speech was entitled “Remaining
Awake through a Revolution,” and he
challenged all of us that evening to stay
engaged in the cause of justice and not to
slumber while the world changed around
us.
Afterward I stood in a long line to
shake Dr. King’s hand. His grace and
piercing moral clarity left a lasting
impression on me. I was raised with a
deep reverence for the virtues of
American democracy. In the view of my
rock-ribbed anti-Communist, Republican
father, the fact that we had the
Declaration of Independence and the
Bill of Rights and the Soviets didn’t was
a defining feature of the ideological
struggle of the Cold War. The promises
that our founding documents made about
freedom and equality were supposed to
be sacrosanct. Now I was realizing that
many Americans were still denied the
rights I took for granted. This lesson and
the power of Dr. King’s words lit a fire
in my heart, fueled by the social justice
teachings of my church. I understood as I
never had before the mission to express
God’s love through good works and
social action.
I was equally inspired by my early
encounters with Marian Wright
Edelman. A 1963 graduate of Yale Law
School, she was the first African
American woman admitted to the
Mississippi Bar and worked as a civil
rights lawyer for the NAACP in Jackson.
When I heard Marian speak during my
first semester at Yale, she opened a door
for me to a life dedicated to legal,
social, and political advocacy for human
rights, especially for women and
children.
One of my first jobs after law school
was working for Marian at the
Children’s Defense Fund. She asked me
to help investigate a mystery: In many
communities, a surprising number of
young children were not in school. We
knew from the census that they lived
there, so what was going on? As part of
a nationwide survey, I went door to door
in New Bedford, Massachusetts, talking
to families. We found some kids staying
home to care for younger siblings while
parents worked. Others had dropped out
to work themselves in order to help
support their families. But mostly we
found children with disabilities who
were staying home because there
weren’t adequate accommodations for
them at the public schools. We found
blind and deaf children, children in
wheelchairs, children with
developmental disabilities, and children
whose families couldn’t afford the
treatment they needed. I remember
meeting a girl in a wheelchair on the
small back porch of her house, where
we sat and talked under a grape arbor.
She so wanted to go to school, to
participate and learn—but it didn’t seem
possible.
Along with many partners across the
country, we collected the data from our
survey and sent it to Washington, and
Congress eventually enacted legislation
declaring that every child in our country
is entitled to an education, including
those with disabilities. For me, it was
the beginning of a lifelong commitment
to children’s rights. I also remained
committed to the cause of people with
disabilities, and at the State Department
I appointed the first Special Advisor for
International Disability Rights to
encourage other governments to protect
the rights of people with disabilities. I
was proud to stand with President
Obama at the White House when he
declared that the United States would
sign the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
which is modeled on the Americans
With Disabilities Act and would be our
first new human rights treaty of the 21st
century. And I was dismayed when a
handful of Republican Senators managed
to block its ratification in December
2012, despite impassioned pleas from
former Republican Senate Majority
Leader and disabled war hero Bob
Dole.

One of my first opportunities to take a
stand on behalf of human rights with the
whole world watching came in
September 1995. As First Lady I was
leading the U.S. delegation to the Fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing,
where I was slated to give a major
speech to representatives from 189
countries, as well as thousands of
journalists and activists.
“What do you want to accomplish?”
Madeleine Albright asked me as I
worked on a draft with Lissa Muscatine,
my talented speechwriter. “I want to
push the envelope as far as I can on
behalf of women and girls,” I replied. I
wanted my speech to be simple, vivid,
and strong in its message that women’s
rights are not separate from or a
subsidiary of the human rights every
person is entitled to enjoy.
During my travels as First Lady, I had
seen firsthand the obstacles that women
and girls faced: how restrictive laws
and customs kept them from pursuing an
education or health care or participating
fully in their nations’ economies and
politics; how even in their own homes
they endured violence and abuse. I
wanted to shine a bright spotlight on
these obstacles and encourage the world
to begin tearing them down. I also
wanted to speak for the women and girls
seeking education, health care, economic
independence, legal rights, and political
participation—and to strike the right
balance between seeing women as
victims of discrimination and seeing
women as agents of change. I wanted to
use my voice to tell the stories not only
of the women I had met but also of the
millions of others whose stories would
not be heard unless I and others told
them.
The heart of the speech was a
statement that was both obvious and
undeniable but nonetheless too long
unsaid on the world stage. “If there is
one message that echoes forth from this
conference,” I declared, “let it be that
human rights are women’s rights and
women’s rights are human rights, once
and for all.”
I offered a list of abuses, including
domestic violence, forced prostitution,
rape as a tactic or prize of war, genital
mutilation, and bride burning, all
violations of women’s rights and also of
human rights, and went on to urge that
the world should condemn them with one
voice. I talked about some of the
remarkable women I had met: new
mothers in Indonesia who came together
regularly in their village to discuss
nutrition, family planning, and baby care;
women in India and Bangladesh who
used microfinance loans to buy milk
cows, rickshaws, thread, and other
materials to start thriving small
businesses; the women in South Africa
who helped lead the struggle to end
apartheid and were now helping to build
a new democracy.
My speech ended with a call to action
for all of us to return to our countries
and renew our efforts to improve
educational, health, legal, economic, and
political opportunities for women. When
the last words left my lips, the delegates
leaped from their seats to give me a
standing ovation. As I exited the hall,
women hung over banisters and raced
down escalators to shake my hand.
My message had resonated with the
women in Beijing, but I could never
have predicted how far and wide the
impact of this twenty-one-minute speech
would stretch. For nearly twenty years
women around the world have quoted
my words back to me, or asked me to
sign a copy of the speech, or shared
personal stories about how it inspired
them to work for change.
Most important, all 189 nations
represented at the conference agreed to
an ambitious and detailed Platform for
Action that called for the “full and equal
participation of women in political,
civil, economic, social and cultural
life.”
Back at the White House I gathered
my team together and said that I wanted
to get right to work building on what we
had accomplished in Beijing. We began
holding regular strategy sessions.
Sometimes we’d meet in the Map Room
on the first floor of the Residence, where
President Franklin Roosevelt tracked the
progress of our military in World War
II. Most of the maps were long gone (I
located one of FDR’s originals showing
the positions of Allied Armies in Europe
in 1945 and hung it over the fireplace),
but it still felt like a good place to plan a
global campaign. This time we weren’t
fighting fascism or Communism, but our
goal was big and bold: advancing the
rights and opportunities of half the
world’s population.
In this context you could look at a map
of the world in a number of ways. It was
easy to see one problem after another.
Throw a dart at the map, and you were
likely to hit a country where women
faced violence and abuse, an economy
where women were denied the chance to
participate and prosper, or a political
system that excluded women. It was no
coincidence that the places where
women’s lives were most undervalued
largely lined up with the parts of the
world most plagued by instability,
conflict, extremism, and poverty.
This was a point lost on many of the
men working across Washington’s
foreign policy establishment, but over
the years I came to view it as one of the
most compelling arguments for why
standing up for women and girls was not
just the right thing to do but also smart
and strategic. The mistreatment of
women was certainly not the only or
even the chief cause of our problems in
Afghanistan, where the Taliban banished
girls from school and forced women to
live in medieval conditions, or in
Central Africa, where rape became a
common weapon of war. But the
correlation was undeniable, and a
growing body of research showed that
improving conditions for women helped
resolve conflicts and stabilize societies.
“Women’s issues” had long been
relegated to the margins of U.S. foreign
policy and international diplomacy,
considered at best a nice thing to work
on but hardly a necessity. I became
convinced that, in fact, this was a cause
that cut to the heart of our national
security.
There was another way to look at the
map. Instead of problems, you could see
opportunities. The world was full of
women finding new ways to solve old
problems. They were eager to go to
school, own land, start a business, and
run for office. There were partnerships
to form and leaders to nurture, if we
were willing to step up. I encouraged
our government, the private sector, the
NGO community, and international
institutions to take up this challenge and
to see women not as victims to be saved
but as partners to be embraced.
I had two Chiefs of Staff in the White
House who were indispensable traveling
companions on my journey. Maggie
Williams, who worked with me at the
Children’s Defense Fund in the 1980s, is
a terrific communicator and one of the
most creative and decent people I’ve
ever met. She helped set the course for
my time as First Lady and remained a
close friend and confidante ever since.
Melanne Verveer was Maggie’s Deputy
in the first term and then her successor in
the second. We’ve always had a real
mutual admiration society. Melanne and
her husband, Phil, had studied at
Georgetown with Bill, and she had gone
on to be a star on Capitol Hill and at
People for the American Way. Her
energy and intellect are simply
unstoppable, and her passion for
working on behalf of women and girls is
unmatched.
The years that followed Beijing saw
exciting progress. In many countries
laws that once permitted unequal
treatment of women and girls were
repealed. The United Nations created a
new body called UN Women, and the
Security Council passed resolutions
recognizing the crucial role of women in
peacemaking and security. Researchers
at the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), and other
institutions expanded their study of the
untapped potential of women to drive
economic growth and social progress.
As women gained the chance to work,
learn, and participate in their societies,
their economic, social, and political
contributions multiplied.
Yet despite this progress, women and
girls still comprise the majority of the
world’s unhealthy, unfed, and unpaid. At
the end of 2013, women held less than
22 percent of all seats in Parliaments
and Legislatures around the world. In
some places women cannot open a bank
account or sign a contract. More than a
hundred countries still have laws that
limit or prohibit women’s participation
in the economy. Twenty years ago,
American women made 72 cents on the
dollar. Today it’s still not equal. Women
also hold a majority of lower wage jobs
in this country and nearly three quarters
of all jobs in fields that rely on tips like
waiters, bartenders, and hairstylists—
which pay even less than average hourly
work. Meanwhile, only a small
percentage of Fortune 500 CEOs are
women. In short, the journey toward full
participation for women and girls is far
from over.
Faced with these grim facts, it can be
easy to get discouraged. In the White
House after Beijing, at times when I felt
daunted by the scope of the challenges
we were trying to overcome, I often
found myself looking for comfort to a
portrait of Eleanor Roosevelt that I kept
in my office. The example she set as a
fearless First Lady and a courageous
fighter for human rights inspired and
fortified me. After Franklin Roosevelt’s
death and the end of World War II,
Eleanor represented the United States as
a delegate to the new United Nations and
helped shape its development. During
the first meeting of the UN General
Assembly, in London in early 1946, she
joined the sixteen other women
delegates in publishing “an open letter to
the women of the world,” in which they
argued that “women in various parts of
the world are at different stages of
participation in the life of their
community,” but “the goal of full
participation in the life and
responsibilities of their countries and of
the world community is a common
objective toward which the women of
the world should assist one another.”
Eleanor’s language of “full
participation,” echoed in the Beijing
Platform for Action nearly fifty years
later, has always resonated with me.
So have many of her other words. “A
woman is like a tea bag,” she once
observed wryly. “You never know how
strong she is until she’s in hot water.” I
love that and, in my experience, it’s spot
on. In 1959, by which time Eleanor was
a revered elder stateswoman near the
end of her life, she used one of her
newspaper columns to issue a call to
action to the American people: “We
have not yet succeeded in our democracy
in giving every one of our citizens equal
freedom and equal opportunity, and that
is our unfinished business.” As I dove
deeper into my work on behalf of
women and girls around the world, I
started describing the quest for equal
rights and full participation for women
as the “unfinished business” of our time.
It was a reminder to audiences—and to
me—just how far we still had to go.
Eleanor Roosevelt’s greatest
achievement was the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the first
binding international agreement on the
rights of humankind. In the aftermath of
World War II and the Holocaust, many
nations were pressing for a statement of
this kind to help ensure that we would
prevent future atrocities and protect the
inherent humanity and dignity of all
people. The Nazis were able to pursue
their crimes because they were able
progressively to constrict the circle of
those defined as humans. This cold, dark
region of the human soul, where people
withdraw first understanding, then
empathy, and finally even the
designation of personhood from another
human being, was not, of course, unique
to Nazi Germany. The impulse to
dehumanize has reappeared throughout
history, and it was precisely this impulse
that the drafters of the Universal
Declaration hoped to restrain.
They discussed, they wrote, they
revisited, revised, and rewrote. They
incorporated suggestions and revisions
from governments, organizations, and
individuals around the world. It is
telling that even in the drafting of the
Universal Declaration there was a
debate about women’s rights. The initial
version of the first article stated, “All
men are created equal.” It took women
members of the Commission, led by
Hansa Mehta of India, to point out that
“all men” might be interpreted to
exclude women. Only after long debate
was the language changed to say, “All
human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights.”
At 3:00 in the morning on December
10, 1948, after nearly two years of
drafting and one last long night of
debate, the president of the UN General
Assembly called for a vote on the final
text. Forty-eight nations voted in favor,
eight abstained, none dissented, and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
was adopted. It made clear that our
rights are not conferred by governments;
they are the birthright of all people. It
does not matter what country we live in,
who our leaders are, or even who we
are. Because we are human, we
therefore have rights. And because we
have rights, governments are bound to
protect them.
During the Cold War, America’s
devotion to human rights made our
country a source of hope and inspiration
for millions of people around the world.
But our policies and practices did not
always match our ideals. At home it took
the courage of a woman who refused to
give up her seat on a public bus, a
preacher who refused to shut up about
the “fierce urgency of now,” and so
many others who refused to put up with
segregation and discrimination, to force
America to recognize the civil rights of
all our citizens. Around the world our
government often prioritized security
and strategic interests over concerns
about human rights, supporting odious
dictators if they shared our opposition to
Communism.
Throughout the history of American
foreign policy, there has been a running
debate between so-called realists and
idealists. The former, it is argued, place
national security ahead of human rights,
while the latter do the opposite. Those
are categories that I find overly
simplistic. No one should have any
illusions about the gravity of the security
threats America faces, and as Secretary I
had no higher responsibility than to
protect our citizens and our country. But
at the same time, upholding universal
values and human rights is at the core of
what it means to be American. If we
sacrifice those values or let our policies
diverge too far from our ideals, our
influence will wane and our country will
cease to be what Abraham Lincoln
called the “the last best hope of earth.”
Moreover, defending our values and
defending our interests are often in less
tension than it may sometimes appear.
Over the long term, repression
undermines stability and creates new
threats, while democracy and respect for
human rights create strong and stable
societies.
As you’ve seen throughout this book,
however, there are times when we do
have to make difficult compromises. Our
challenge is to be clear-eyed about the
world as it is while never losing sight of
the world as we want it to become.
That’s why I don’t mind that I’ve been
called both an idealist and a realist over
the years. I prefer being considered a
hybrid, perhaps an idealistic realist.
Because I, like our country, embody both
tendencies.
One of my favorite examples of how
support for human rights advances our
strategic interests comes from the 1970s,
when the United States under President
Gerald Ford signed the Helsinki
Accords with the Soviet Union. Some
commentators in the West dismissed the
human rights provisions in the
agreements as the height of idealist folly,
not worth the paper they were printed
on. The Soviets would obviously
disregard them.
Then something unexpected happened.
Behind the Iron Curtain activists and
dissidents felt empowered to begin
working for change because the Helsinki
Accords gave them cover to talk about
human rights. Communist officials were
caught in a bind. They couldn’t condemn
a document the Kremlin had signed, but
if they enforced its provisions the entire
authoritarian system would break down.
In the years that followed, the shipyard
workers of Solidarity in Poland,
reformers in Hungary, and demonstrators
in Prague all seized on the fundamental
rights defined at Helsinki. They held
their governments to account for not
living up to the standards to which they
had agreed. Helsinki proved to be a
Trojan horse that contributed to the fall
of Communism. There was nothing
“soft” about that.
I tried never to forget the wisdom of
Helsinki and the strategic impact human
rights can have. Any time I needed a
reminder, I just looked over at that
portrait of Eleanor Roosevelt, which I
still kept near my desk.
In late 1997, two years after the
conference in Beijing, the United
Nations invited me to help kick off
commemorations of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. On December 10,
which had become known as Human
Rights Day, I went to UN headquarters
in New York and delivered a speech
about our shared responsibility to carry
the Declaration’s legacy forward into
the new millennium. I praised the
progress the world had made since
1948, but noted, “We have not expanded
the circle of human dignity far enough.
There are still too many of our fellow
men and women excluded from the
fundamental rights proclaimed in the
Declaration, too many whom we have
hardened our hearts against—those
whose human suffering we fail fully to
see, to hear, and to feel.” In particular I
called attention to the women and girls
around the world who were still
systematically denied their rights and
shut out from opportunities to participate
in their societies. “The full
enfranchisement of the rights of women
is unfinished business in this turbulent
century,” I said, echoing Eleanor’s
phrase. “It is because every era has its
blind spots that we must see our own
unfinished business now while we stand
on the threshold of a new millennium
with even greater urgency. We must
rededicate ourselves to completing the
circle of human rights once and for all.”

When I became Secretary of State in
2009, I was determined to put this
“unfinished business” at the top of
America’s diplomatic to-do list.
Melanne Verveer was one of my first
calls. She had spent the previous eight
years running Vital Voices, an
organization she and I had started with
Madeleine Albright to find and support
emerging women leaders around the
world. I asked Melanne to serve as the
first Ambassador-at-Large for Global
Women’s Issues and to help me craft a
“full participation agenda” and weave it
into the fabric of American foreign
policy and national security. We had to
push tradition-bound bureaus and
agencies to think differently about the
role of women in conflicts and
peacemaking, economic and democratic
development, public health, and more. I
didn’t want her office to be the only
place where this work was done; rather I
wanted it to be integrated into the daily
routine of our diplomats and
development experts everywhere.
The State Department and USAID
launched a wide range of global and
regional initiatives, including programs
to help women entrepreneurs gain access
to training, markets, finance, and credit;
a partnership with some of America’s
top women’s colleges and universities to
identify, mentor, and train women in
public service around the world; and
efforts to help more women use mobile
technology for everything from secure
banking to documenting gender-based
violence. Melanne tirelessly traveled the
world, finding local partners and
ensuring that these efforts took root in
communities as well as capitals. I liked
to joke with her that she might be the
only person I knew with more frequentflier miles than I. (If only the Air Force
offered them!)
Many years ago on a trip across
Africa I was struck that everywhere I
went I saw women laboring in the fields,
women carrying water, women fetching
firewood, women working at market
stalls. I was talking to some economists,
and I asked them, “How do you evaluate
the contributions that women make to the
economy?” One of them replied, “We
don’t, because they don’t participate in
the economy.” He meant the formal
economy of offices and factories. But if
women across the world all of a sudden
stopped working one day, those
economists would quickly discover that
women actually contribute quite a lot to
the economy, as well as to the peace and
security of their communities.
I encountered this attitude all over the
world. I can’t tell you how many times I
sat across the table from some President
or Prime Minister whose eyes glazed
over whenever I raised the issue of
women’s rights and opportunities in his
country. I quietly kept track of how many
women leaders or advisors ever joined
those meetings. It wasn’t hard to do,
because there were hardly any.
My most egregious interaction with a
clueless leader was in the remote
Southeast Asian island nation of Papua
New Guinea in November 2010. It’s a
mysterious and bountiful country on the
verge of progress, but plagued by one of
the highest rates of violence against
women in the world. According to one
estimate, 70 percent of women in Papua
New Guinea will be victims of rape or
physical violence in their lifetime. At
our joint press conference, Prime
Minister Sir Michael Somare was asked
by an American reporter what his
response was to these troubling
statistics. Somare claimed the problems
were “exaggerated by people who write
about us.” Yes, he admitted, there were
some cases of violence, but he added, “I
have been around for a long time and I
know that men and the women,
sometimes there are fights, arguments do
take place, but it’s nothing very brutal.”
There were laws in place, he said. “We
have cases where people are drunk. . . .
A person cannot control when he’s under
the influence of liquor.” I was taken
aback, to say the least, and even the
jaded American press corps was
speechless. Afterward, as you can
imagine, Melanne and I got right to work
on new programs and partnerships with
civil society in Papua New Guinea,
trying to amplify women’s voices and
provide them with new platforms for
participation. I am pleased that in May
2013, a new Prime Minister, Peter
O’Neill, formally apologized to the
women of his country for the violence
and promised to toughen criminal
penalties.
Even at home in Washington our work
on behalf of women was often seen as a
parenthetical exercise, somehow
separate from the important work of
foreign policy. In one Washington Post
article about our efforts with women in
Afghanistan, an unnamed senior
administration official sniffed, “Gender
issues are going to have to take a
backseat to other priorities. . . . There’s
no way we can be successful if we
maintain every special interest and pet
project. All those pet rocks in our
rucksack were taking us down.” I wasn’t
surprised the official was afraid to be
named making a comment like that.
Melanne and I started calling her shop
the Pet Rock Office and kept on
working.
I have to admit, I grew tired of
watching otherwise thoughtful people
just smile and nod when I brought up the
concerns of women and girls. I’d been
championing these issues on the world
stage for nearly twenty years, and
sometimes it felt like all I was doing
was preaching to the choir. So I decided
to redouble our efforts to make a case
strong enough to convince skeptics
based on hard data and clear-eyed
analysis that creating opportunities for
women and girls across the globe
directly supports everyone’s security
and prosperity, and should be part of our
diplomacy and development work.
Melanne’s team began combing
through all the data that had been
collected by institutions such as the
World Bank and the IMF. They quickly
learned that some aspects of women’s
participation were well studied,
especially the benefits of bringing more
women into the workforce and the
obstacles that held them back, but others
were significantly under-researched. In
many parts of the world there was a lack
of reliable and regular data on even the
basic facts about the lives of women and
girls, such as whether they had birth
certificates, at what age they had their
first child, how many hours of paid and
unpaid work they did, or whether they
owned the land they farmed.
I’ve always believed that good
decisions in government, in business,
and in life are based on evidence rather
than ideology. This is especially true
when it comes to policies that will affect
millions of people. You have to do the
research and run the numbers; that’s how
we minimize risk and maximize impact.
And these days we keep statistics on
everything we care about, from RBIs in
baseball to ROI in business. There’s a
saying in management circles: “What
gets measured gets done.” So if we were
serious about helping more girls and
women achieve their full potential, then
we had to get serious about gathering
and analyzing the data about the
conditions they faced and the
contributions they made. We needed not
only more data but also better data. We
needed to make it accessible to
researchers and policymakers so it could
help them make good decisions. The
State Department launched a number of
new initiatives to fill the data gaps,
working with the UN, the World Bank,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and others.
(In general I was surprised how many
people in Washington operated in an
“evidence-free zone,” where data and
science were disregarded. A senior
advisor to President Bush was once
quoted disparaging what he called “the
reality-based community” of people who
“believe that solutions emerge from your
judicious study of discernible reality.”
I’ve always thought that’s exactly how to
solve problems. The Bush aide went on,
“That’s not the way the world really
works anymore. . . . We’re an empire
now, and when we act, we create our
own reality.” That attitude helps explain
a lot of what went wrong in those years.)
We didn’t have to wait for all these
projects to bear fruit to start trumpeting
the data we already had, especially on
women and the economy. And you didn’t
have to look far. In the early 1970s,
American women held 37 percent of all
jobs in the United States, compared to
47 percent in 2009. The productivity
gains attributable to this increase
accounted for more than $3.5 trillion in
GDP growth over four decades.
The story has played out in less
developed economies as well. For
example, Latin America and the
Caribbean steadily increased women’s
participation in the labor market starting
in the 1990s. The World Bank has
estimated that extreme poverty in the
region decreased by 30 percent as a
result of recent gains.
These and similar findings add up to a
compelling case that it is in everyone’s
interest to increase women’s
participation in the economy and to tear
down the barriers that still hold them
back. In September 2011 I assembled all
the data I could and made this argument
at a summit of Asian-Pacific leaders in
San Francisco. “To achieve the
economic expansion we all seek, we
need to unlock a vital source of growth
that can power our economies in the
decades to come,” I told the delegates.
“And that vital source of growth is
women. With economic models straining
in every corner of the world, none of us
can afford to perpetuate the barriers
facing women in the workforce.”
I was delighted when the Prime
Minister of Japan Shinzo Abe announced
that increasing women’s economic
participation would be a pillar of his
ambitious new economic agenda. It was
dubbed “womenomics.” He detailed
plans to improve access to affordable
child care and extend parental leave to
encourage more women to enter the
workforce. Abe also asked the country’s
biggest businesses to each appoint at
least one woman executive. We need
more far-sighted leadership like that at
home and around the world.
Another area where we focused our
efforts was the role of women in making
and keeping peace. We had seen so
many inspiring examples of women
around the world making unique
contributions to ending conflicts and
rebuilding shattered societies in Liberia,
Colombia, Rwanda, Northern Ireland,
and elsewhere. I remember vividly my
visit to a fish and chips restaurant in
Belfast in 1995, where I had a chance to
sit and drink tea with both Catholic and
Protestant women who were tired of the
Troubles and eager for peace. While
they may have attended different
churches on Sunday, seven days a week
they all said a silent prayer for the safe
return of a child from school or a
husband from an errand in town. One of
them, Joyce McCartan, who founded the
Women’s Drop-In Center in 1987 after
her seventeen-year-old son was shot and
killed, said: “It takes women to bring
men to their senses.”
When women participate in peace
processes, they tend to focus discussion
on issues like human rights, justice,
national reconciliation, and economic
renewal that are critical to making
peace. They generally build coalitions
across ethnic and sectarian lines and are
more likely to speak up for other
marginalized groups. They often act as
mediators and help to foster
compromise.
Yet despite all that women tend to
bring to the table, more often than not
they’re excluded. Of the hundreds of
peace treaties signed since the early
1990s, fewer than 10 percent had any
women negotiators, fewer than 3 percent
had any women signatories, and only a
small percentage included even a single
reference to women. So it’s not too
surprising that more than half of all
peace agreements fail within five years.
I spent years trying to get generals,
diplomats, and national security
policymakers in our own country and
around the world to tune in to this
reality. I found sympathetic allies at the
Pentagon and in the White House,
including Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy Michèle Flournoy and
Admiral Sandy Winnefeld, Vice
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
State, USAID, and Defense got to work
on a plan that would change the way
diplomats, development experts, and
military personnel interact with women
in conflict and postconflict areas. There
would be new emphasis on stopping
rape and gender-based violence and
empowering women to make and keep
peace. We called it a National Action
Plan on Women, Peace, and Security.
In December 2011, President Obama
issued an executive order launching the
plan. Flournoy and Winnefeld joined me
at Georgetown to explain it to the public.
Looking at the Admiral in his crisp Navy
uniform at an event about women as
peacemakers, I hoped we had finally
turned a corner, at least in our country.
As my term as Secretary drew to a
close, I wanted to be sure that the
changes we had made to knit gender
issues into every aspect of U.S. foreign
policy wouldn’t disappear after I left. In
any bureaucracy, institutionalizing
reforms is difficult, and that was
certainly true at the State Department.
Over several months we worked with
the White House to prepare a
Presidential Memorandum that would
make Melanne’s position of
Ambassador-at-Large for Global
Women’s Issues permanent and ensure
that her successors reported directly to
the Secretary of State. It took some
pressing to get this through the White
House system, but luckily my former
Deputy Secretary Jack Lew had become
President Obama’s Chief of Staff, so we
had a very well-placed ally. On January
30, 2013, one of my last days in office, I
had lunch with President Obama in his
private dining room off the Oval Office,
and, as I was leaving, he stopped me to
watch him sign the memorandum. He
could not have given me a better sendoff.

Our work on behalf of women and girls
around the world was embedded in a
broader human rights agenda aimed at
defending the freedoms enshrined in the
Declaration of Human Rights and making
them real in the lives of people all over
the world.
In 2009, there was no denying that our
country’s approach to human rights had
gotten somewhat out of balance. On his
second full day in office President
Obama issued an executive order
prohibiting the use of torture or official
cruelty by any U.S. official and ordered
the closure of Guantánamo Bay (a goal
that has not yet been achieved). He
pledged to put human rights back at the
heart of our foreign policy.
As I’ve described, the United States
became a champion of freedom on the
internet and stepped up aid to dissidents
trying to evade censors and bypass
firewalls. We advocated on behalf of
journalists thrown in jail for exposing
inconvenient truths about repressive
regimes, helped survivors of human
trafficking step out of the shadows, and
made the case for workers’ rights and
fair labor standards. Behind these
headlines was the daily work of
diplomacy: pressing foreign
governments, supporting dissidents,
engaging civil society, and making sure
that our own government kept human
rights front and center in all policy
deliberations.
One of our first steps was to rejoin the
UN Human Rights Council, a fortyseven-member body created in 2006 to
monitor abuses around the world. It
replaced the UN Human Rights
Commission, which Eleanor Roosevelt
had helped establish and lead in the late
1940s. Over time it had become a
laughingstock as notorious human rights
violators like Sudan and Zimbabwe
were elected as members. The new
organization faced the same problems;
even Cuba won a seat. The Bush
Administration refused to participate,
and the Council seemed to spend most of
its time condemning Israel. So why join?
It wasn’t that the Obama Administration
didn’t see the Council’s flaws, but we
decided that participating would give us
the best chance to be a constructive
influence and put it on a better track.
The Council continued to have serious
problems, but it proved to be a useful
platform for advancing our agenda.
When Muammar Qaddafi was using
extreme violence against civilians in
Libya in early 2011, I went to the
Council in Geneva to rally the world
against his atrocities. While there I
spoke out against a continuing bias
against Israel. I also urged the Council to
move beyond a decade-long debate over
whether insults to religion should be
banned or criminalized. “It is time to
overcome the false divide that pits
religious sensitivities against freedom of
expression and pursue a new approach
based on concrete steps to fight
intolerance wherever it occurs,” I said.
For years some Muslim-majority
nations at the Council had pushed
resolutions opposed by the United States
and others that would have threatened
freedom of expression in the name of
preventing “defamation” of religion.
This was not just a theoretical exercise,
considering the firestorms that erupted
periodically when someone around the
world published a cartoon or posted a
video online denigrating the Prophet
Muhammad. I thought we could break the
impasse by recognizing that tolerance
and freedom are both core values that
need protecting. To reach a compromise,
we needed a partner willing to move
past the charged political and
ideological questions clouding the
debate.
We found that partner in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
which represents nearly sixty nations. Its
chair, the Turkish diplomat and scholar
Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, was a thoughtful
man whom I had met in the 1990s, when
he was the director of the Research
Centre for Islamic History, Art and
Culture in Istanbul. İhsanoğlu agreed to
work with me on a new resolution at the
Human Rights Council that would take a
strong stand for freedom of expression
and worship and against discrimination
and violence based upon religion or
belief, while avoiding the broad
prohibitions on speech called for in the
former “defamation” resolutions. Our
teams in Geneva began hammering out
the text, and in late March 2011 the
Council unanimously adopted it.
Religious freedom is a human right
unto itself, and it is also wrapped up
with other rights, including the right of
people to think what they want, say what
they think, associate with others, and
assemble peacefully without the state
looking over their shoulders or
prohibiting them from doing so. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
makes clear that each of us is born free
to practice any religion, to change our
religion, or to have none at all. No state
may grant these freedoms as a privilege
or take them away as a punishment.
Every year the State Department
publishes a report detailing cases of
religious persecution around the world.
For example, in Iran authorities repress
Sufi Muslims, evangelical Christians,
Jews, Bahais, Sunnis, Ahmadis, and
others who do not share the
government’s religious views. We also
tracked a troubling resurgence of antiSemitism in parts of Europe; in countries
like France, Poland, and the Netherlands
swastikas were spray-painted on Jewish
tombs, schools, synagogues, and kosher
shops.
In China the government cracked
down on unregistered “house churches”
and the Christians who worshipped in
them, as well as Uighur Muslims and
Tibetan Buddhists. On my first trip to
China as Secretary, in February 2009, I
attended a service in one of these house
churches to send a message to the
government about religious freedom.
Our interest in protecting religious
liberty and the rights of minorities went
beyond a moral argument. There were
also important strategic considerations,
particularly in societies in transition.
When I visited Egypt in 2012, the Coptic
Christians wondered whether they
would be accorded the same rights and
respect as all Egyptians by their new
government. In Burma ethnic Rohingya
Muslims continue to be denied full
citizenship and equal opportunities for
education, employment, and travel. What
Egypt, Burma, and other countries
decide on protections for these religious
minorities will have a major impact on
the lives of their people and will go a
long way toward determining whether
these countries are able to achieve
stability and democracy. History teaches
us that when the rights of minorities are
secure, societies are more stable and
everyone benefits. As I said in
Alexandria, Egypt, in the hot tumultuous
summer of 2012, “Real democracy
means that every citizen has the right to
live, work, and worship as they choose,
whether they are man or woman, Muslim
or Christian, or from any other
background. Real democracy means that
no group or faction or leader can impose
their will, their ideology, their religion,
their desires on anyone else.”

Over the years, I have often returned to
an argument from my speech at the UN
marking the fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
“Here we are at the very close of the
20th century, a century that has been
scorched by war time and time again. If
the history of this century teaches us
anything, it is that whenever the dignity
of any individual or group is
compromised by the derogation of who
they are, of some essential attribute they
possess, then we all leave ourselves
open to nightmares to come.” I urged that
we learn the lesson and extend the circle
of citizenship and human dignity to
include everyone without exception.
When I said those words, I had in
mind not only the women and girls
around the world who continued to be
marginalized in so many ways but other
“invisibles,” from religious and ethnic
minorities to people with disabilities to
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) people. When I look back on my
time as Secretary, I’m proud of the work
we did to extend the circle of human
dignity and human rights to include
people historically excluded.
In January 2011, the world learned
about David Kato. He was a gay activist
in Uganda, well known in that country
and in international advocacy circles.
He had been threatened many times,
including on the front page of a Ugandan
newspaper, which had published a photo
of David and others under the words
“HANG THEM.” Eventually someone
followed through on the threats. David
was killed in what police said was a
robbery but was more likely an
execution.
Like many people in Uganda and
around the world, I was appalled that the
police and government had done little to
protect David after the public calls for
his murder. But this was about more than
police incompetence. The Ugandan
Parliament was considering a bill to
make being gay a crime punishable by
death. A high-ranking government
official—the Minister of Ethics and
Integrity, no less—gave an interview in
which he said dismissively,
“Homosexuals can forget about human
rights.” LGBT people in Uganda were
routinely harassed and attacked, and the
authorities did virtually nothing to stop
it. When I raised these issues with
Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni, he
ridiculed my concerns. “Oh, Hillary,
here you go again,” he would say.
David’s death wasn’t an isolated
incident; it was the result of a
nationwide campaign to suppress LGBT
people by any means necessary, and the
government was part of it.
I asked for a briefing on David’s life
and work and read an interview he gave
in 2009 in which he said he wanted to be
“a good human rights defender, not a
dead one, but an alive one.” He had that
opportunity stolen from him, but others
were continuing his work, and I wanted
the United States to be firmly in their
corner.
Abuse of LGBT people is by no
means exclusive to Uganda. As of this
writing, more than eighty countries
worldwide, from the Caribbean to the
Middle East to South Asia, have in one
way or another made it a crime to be
LGBT. People are jailed for having
same-sex relationships, for wearing
clothes that go against typical gender
norms, or simply for saying that they are
LGBT. Uganda’s neighbor Kenya has
been sending gay men to prison for
years. In northern Nigeria gay men can
still face death by stoning. In Cameroon
in 2012, a man was sent to jail simply
for sending a text to another man that
expressed romantic love. I was deeply
troubled when Nigerian President
Goodluck Jonathan and Uganda’s
Museveni both signed harsh, repressive
antihomosexuality bills in early 2014.
Homosexuality was already criminalized
in both countries, but the new Nigerian
law provides for a prison sentence of
fourteen years for engaging in a samesex relationship and ten years for LGBT
advocacy, and some acts under the new
Ugandan law are punishable by a life
sentence.
The regime of Vladimir Putin in
Russia has enacted a series of antigay
laws, prohibiting the adoption of
Russian children by gay couples or any
couples from countries that allow samesex marriage, and making it a crime to
promote gay rights or even discuss
homosexuality around children. When I
pressed Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov to do more to protect the
rights of LGBT people, the normally
cool and restrained diplomat turned
nasty. Russians don’t have a problem
with homosexuals, he told me, just with
their “propaganda.” “Why do ‘these
people’ have to go around flaunting it?
Russians shouldn’t have to put up with
that.” Lavrov was contemptuous of the
idea of being “on the right side of
history” on this issue; that was just
“sentimental nonsense.” I tried to
explain the steps we were taking to
repeal “Don’t Ask Don’t Tell” and open
up our military to LGBT service
members, and I asked my Defense
Department traveling representative
Admiral Harry Harris to elaborate. The
Russian side of the table started
snickering. “Oh, he is gay?” one of them
asked in a stage whisper. Harry isn’t and
couldn’t care less about Russian jibes,
but I was appalled that my sophisticated
Russian counterparts were casually and
cruelly parroting offensive talking
points.
The dismal state of LGBT rights
around the world had been on the U.S.
human rights radar for some time. Since
1993, when reporting instructions were
changed to include sexual orientation,
the State Department has highlighted
abuses faced by LGBT communities
around the world in its annual Human
Rights Report and has raised the issue in
our dealings with other governments, as
I did with Lavrov and Museveni and
others. We also did quite a bit of
outreach to LGBT populations through
PEPFAR, which not only helped save
millions of lives but brought people who
had been isolated into the public sphere.
But I decided our human rights efforts
needed an upgrade. There was too much
evidence that the climate for LGBT
people was deteriorating in many parts
of the world. This was in stark
opposition to the remarkable progress in
other places, including the United States.
It was a terrible irony: In some parts of
the world life for LGBT people was
better than ever; in others it had never
been worse.
Meanwhile, I looked for ways to
make progress closer to home, by better
supporting the LGBT members of the
State Department family. In earlier
generations talented members of the
Foreign Service had been forced to
resign when their sexual orientation
became known. Those days were gone,
but there were still plenty of rules in
place that made life harder for our
LGBT colleagues. So in 2009, I
extended the full range of legally
available benefits and allowances to
same-sex domestic partners of Foreign
Service staff serving abroad. In 2010, I
directed that the State Department’s
equal employment opportunity policy
explicitly protect against discriminatory
treatment of employees and job
applicants based on gender identity. We
also made it easier for Americans to
change the sex listed on their passport
and made it possible for same-sex
couples to obtain passports under the
names recognized by their state through
their marriage or civil union. To support
the antibullying movement started by the
columnist Dan Savage, I recorded an “It
Gets Better” video that went viral. I
don’t know if my words of comfort and
encouragement reached any at-risk
teenagers, but I hope they did.
I supported the State Department’s
annual Pride event, hosted by a group
called GLIFAA, Gays and Lesbians in
Foreign Affairs Agencies. As the name
suggests, these are LGBT people who
work in U.S. foreign affairs, so they
have a strong professional stake in
improving the climate for LGBT people
abroad, as well as here at home. The
annual Pride celebration they organized
at State was at once joyful and
purposeful. At the 2010 Pride
celebration, after recapping some of the
progress we’d made together in the past
year, I turned to the terrible harms still
being suffered by LGBT people
worldwide. “These dangers are not gay
issues—this is a human rights issue,” I
said. The room burst into whoops and
cheers. I went on: “Just as I was very
proud to say the obvious more than
fifteen years ago in Beijing, that human
rights are women’s rights and women’s
rights are human rights, let me say today
that human rights are gay rights and gay
rights are human rights, once and for
all.” Again loud, sustained applause. Of
course, I had hoped that my remarks
would be well received, but I was
surprised by the passionate reaction
from the crowd. Clearly this was
something people had been waiting to
hear even more fervently than I had
realized. Later Dan Baer, an active
member of GLIFAA, confirmed this.
“You need to say this to the world,” he
told me.
With that the work began on one of the
most memorable speeches I delivered as
Secretary of State.
Most of my major speeches as
Secretary were, naturally, thick with
foreign policy. They laid out multiyear,
multipronged strategies on complex
issues. Often they included carefully
worded caveats, encoded warnings, and
at least a few instances of diplomatic
jargon. My speechwriters worked hard
to make every one accessible to the
broadest possible audience, but the fact
remained: Foreign policy speeches tend
to be wonky, and their most fervent
listeners and readers are foreign policy
professionals, whether government
officials, think tank experts, or
journalists on the beat.
I wanted this speech to be different. I
wanted it to mean something to LGBT
people in lots of different circumstances
—not just the activists on the front lines,
fluent in the argot of human rights, but
also the bullied teenager in rural
America, or Armenia or Algeria, for that
matter. I wanted it to be simple and
direct—the exact opposite of the overthe-top, darkly suggestive language you
hear in many antigay jeremiads. I wanted
it to at least have a chance at convincing
dubious listeners, so it needed to be
reasonable and respectful, without
backing a millimeter away from its
defense of human rights. Most of all, I
wanted it to send a clear message to the
leaders of countries everywhere:
Protecting their LGBT citizens was part
of their human rights obligations, and the
world was watching to make sure they’d
meet them.
Before we started writing the speech,
I wanted to figure out where I’d give it,
since on a topic this sensitive the
location and occasion would matter
more than usual. It was early 2011. I had
travel scheduled to just about every
region of the world in the coming
months. Would one of those trips be the
right one? I was going to Africa in
August, and we briefly considered going
to Uganda and giving the speech in
David Kato’s memory, but ruled that out
pretty quickly. I wanted to avoid at all
costs suggesting that antigay violence is
just an African problem rather than a
global problem, or giving local bigots an
excuse to complain about U.S. bullying. I
wanted the only story to be the message
of the speech itself.
We looked at the calendar; maybe we
should choose a significant date rather
than a significant location. The 2011
Pride celebration in June? No—if I gave
the speech in the United States, it
wouldn’t be the speech I envisioned.
The press would cover it from a
domestic political angle, if they covered
it at all. (Talking about LGBT rights
during Pride Month isn’t exactly
newsworthy.) It just wouldn’t make the
same impact.
Eventually Jake Sullivan and Dan
Baer both had the same idea: I should
deliver the speech in Geneva, at the
headquarters of the UN Human Rights
Council. If my goal was to firmly place
LGBT rights within the international
community’s framework of human rights,
there was no better place to do it.
So we had a place. What about a
date? We decided on the first week of
December, to mark the anniversary of
the signing of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, just as I had done back
in 1997. The historical significance was
meaningful; more practically, I was
already scheduled to be in Europe that
week for meetings at NATO
headquarters in Brussels. Adding a stop
in Geneva would be easy.
Writing the speech wasn’t easy. I
wanted to refute the most egregious
myths that antigay zealots spread as
truth, including those that government
Ministers had said in all seriousness to
me when I pressed them to treat LGBT
people humanely. My speechwriter
Megan Rooney researched the most
outlandish examples. There were so
many: that gay people were mentally ill
child abusers; that God wanted us to
reject and isolate them; that poor
countries couldn’t afford to care about
human rights; that these countries didn’t
have any LGBT people at all. That’s
what Iranian President Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad told an audience at
Columbia University in 2007, “In Iran,
we don’t have homosexuals, like in your
country.” I’d heard similar things in
private many times.
In our first draft we listed five
common myths and then debunked them
one by one. The speech evolved quite a
bit over several successive drafts, but
we ended up sticking with that basic
structure throughout. I knew the speech
needed to be exceedingly calm and
measured if it had any chance of
changing anyone’s mind, so many of my
edits were aimed at that; for example,
“five myths” became “five issues.” I
thought it was important to acknowledge
that many views on LGBT people are
rooted in religious and cultural
traditions that hold great meaning in
people’s lives and shouldn’t be treated
contemptuously. “I come here before you
with respect, understanding and
humility,” I wrote. The strength of the
ideas were undiminished by the more
measured language.
I told Megan to go back to my 1995
Beijing speech and use that as a model.
After all, what I wanted to do here was
very similar: name the ugly things
happening to this group of people and
declare that they are human rights
violations, for the simple fact is that
these people are human beings. That was
it: no complex arguments, no thundering
rhetoric, just a few unadorned assertions
that were long overdue.
There were a few strategic questions
we needed to answer. First: Should we
“name and shame” countries that had
taken steps in the wrong direction? An
early draft of the speech called out
Uganda, among others. I decided that
was a mistake. Any list would be
incomplete; plus I knew that any country
singled out for criticism would feel
obligated to respond, most likely
defensively and angrily. After all, the
United States has made strides, but we
still have work to do on equality for
LGBT Americans. I wanted this speech
to make leaders think, not lash out.
Instead, we looked for examples of
non-Western countries that had made
great progress on LGBT rights. What
better way was there to refute the myth
that supporting LGBT people was a
Western, colonialist practice? Happily
there were many to choose from. In the
end I praised Mongolia, Nepal, South
Africa, India, Argentina, and Colombia
and quoted the former President of
Botswana.
The second question: How should we
advertise the speech? If we said it was
about LGBT human rights, we knew
some people—exactly the people we
wanted to reach—would stay away. So
we decided to bill it simply as a human
rights speech marking the anniversary of
the Universal Declaration, and leave it
at that.
In the weeks leading up to the speech,
once most of it was set, I kept my ears
open for stories and ideas worth adding.
At a meeting at the White House the
Commandant of the Marine Corps shared
an anecdote about the repeal of Don’t
Ask Don’t Tell. “I was against it and I
said so at the time,” he told me. “But
once it happened I saw that my fears
were unfounded.” The Marines had
embraced the change with proud
professionalism, he added. Into the
speech it went. My Legal Advisor
Harold Koh suggested adding something
about the importance of empathy,
walking in someone else’s shoes. It
ended up being one of the loveliest parts
of the speech.
Finally, we left for Europe.
Switzerland was to be the third country
in a five-country tour, one country per
day. In Germany I led the U.S.
delegation at a conference on
Afghanistan. In Lithuania, I attended a
meeting of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. When we
finally arrived at our small, charming
hotel in Vilnius, many of my staff headed
to the hotel bar for a late dinner of
Lithuanian specialties. But Megan and
Jake were too nervous about the next
day’s remarks to relax. They headed to
her hotel room, sat on the floor, and with
Dan Baer (who was already in Geneva)
on speakerphone, went through every
line of the speech. They finished just
before dawn.
Early the next morning I learned that
the White House had finally approved a
policy change that we had been
discussing. From now on, the United
States would take into account the LGBT
human rights record of a country when
appropriating foreign aid. This kind of
policy has a real chance of influencing
the actions of other governments. I was
looking forward to adding it to the
speech.
On December 6, we flew into Geneva
and headed to the Palace of Nations. It
was looking even more palatial than
usual. The building is impressive enough
on a normal day; built to be the
headquarters for the League of Nations,
it opened in 1936, a last gasp of
optimism before Europe disintegrated.
Here many of the great questions of
20th-century diplomacy were arbitrated,
from nuclear disarmament to the
independence of nations emerging from
colonialism. Its corridors and chambers
are always crowded, but on this day it
was thronged with people.
I walked onto the stage and began.
Today, I want to talk about the
work we have left to do to protect
one group of people whose human
rights are still denied in too many
parts of the world today. In many
ways, they are an invisible
minority. They are arrested,
beaten, terrorized, even executed.
Many are treated with contempt
and violence by their fellow
citizens while authorities
empowered to protect them look
the other way or, too often, even
join in the abuse. They are denied
opportunities to work and learn,
driven from their homes and
countries, and forced to suppress
or deny who they are to protect
themselves from harm.
Some in the audience had a curious look
on their faces. Where was this going?
“I am talking about gay, lesbian,
bisexual and transgender people,” I
continued.
I was proud to deliver every word of
that speech, but a few lines in particular
stand out in my memory. Remembering
David Kato, I spoke directly to all the
other brave LGBT activists fighting
uphill battles in lonely, dangerous places
worldwide: “You have an ally in the
United States of America. And you have
millions of friends among the American
people.”
Remembering all the conversations
I’d had with foreign leaders who threw
up their hands and said, “Our people
hate gays, they support these laws, what
can we do?,” I spoke directly to those
officials: “Leadership, by definition,
means being out in front of your people
when it is called for. It means standing
up for the dignity of all your citizens and
persuading your people to do the same.”
And in an echo of my speech in
Beijing and my words at the State
Department a year earlier, I said, “Like
being a woman, like being a racial,
religious, tribal, or ethnic minority,
being LGBT does not make you less
human. And that is why gay rights are
human rights, and human rights are gay
rights.”
I woke up the following morning to
my first indication that the speech had
broken through: the hairdresser who
styled my hair that morning, who was
gay, theatrically fell to his knees in
gratitude. I laughed and told him to get
up, for heaven’s sake. My hair, as usual,
couldn’t wait.
The ripples created by the speech
were bouncing around the globe and
back, and my phone was soon crowded
with messages. A huge number of people
had watched the speech online. I was
gratified, for many reasons. Though I had
expected a few of the African delegates
in the audience that day to walk out, they
did not. And as I’ve seen from the many
pictures and videos people have sent me
from Pride events around the world, the
words “gay rights are human rights”
have been blazoned on countless
posters, banners, and T-shirts. I was
proud that America had once again stood
up for human rights, just as we had on so
many previous occasions.
Late in my term, I received a letter
from a Foreign Service officer stationed
in Latin America that has become a
treasured possession: “I write you not as
an employee of the Department of State
writing to the Secretary, but as a
husband and as a father writing to thank
you, as an individual, for all you have
done for our family over the past four
years. I had long dreamt of being a
Foreign Service Officer, but had never
seriously considered it until you became
our Secretary of State. The moment that
you directed the Department to recognize
same-sex spouses as family members,
the one thing that had been holding me
back was suddenly no longer standing in
the way.” He went on to describe the joy
of having his husband of seven years be
able to join him at his foreign post and
that, as a result, they were able to
welcome twins into the world as well.
He even enclosed a photo of their happy
family. “What was hardly imaginable
three years ago . . . that we’d be
diplomats for our country, that our
relationship would be recognized by the
government, that we’d be able to be
fathers, has all come true.”

When I left the State Department in 2013
and began working at the Clinton
Foundation in New York, I knew that I
wanted to continue working on “the great
unfinished business of the 21st century.”
The fast-approaching twentieth
anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women in Beijing helped
focus my thinking. I was proud of how
much had been accomplished in that
time. Yet there was no doubt that we
were still a long way from the goal of
“full and equal participation.”
Melanne had started an academic
center on women, peace, and security at
Georgetown University, for which I
agreed to serve as honorary founding
chair. Now that we weren’t flying
around the globe every other day, we
found ourselves talking and thinking
more about the sweep of history and the
future of the movement to which we had
devoted so many years. I called Maggie
Williams and asked her to come
strategize with us. Along with Chelsea
and our great team at the Clinton
Foundation, including Jen Klein and
Rachel Vogelstein, who both had played
key roles at the State Department, we
came up with a new plan.
At the annual meeting of the Clinton
Global Initiative in New York in
September 2013, I announced that the
Clinton Foundation would mobilize a
broad effort to evaluate the progress
women and girls had made since Beijing
and to chart the path forward to achieve
full and equal participation for women
and girls. I said it was time for a cleareyed look at how far we’d come, how
far we still had to go, and what we
planned to do about this unfinished
business.
With partners like the Gates
Foundation, we began work on a digital
“global review” of the status of women
and girls in time for the twentieth
anniversary of Beijing in September
2015. I wanted everyone to be able to
see the gains we’d made, as well as the
gaps that remained. We’d present easily
accessible information that could be
shared and put to use by advocates,
academics, and political leaders to
design reforms and drive real change.
I also wanted to build on the Platform
for Action the world endorsed in Beijing
and lay out a 21st-century agenda to
accelerate full participation for women
and girls around the world, including in
areas that were still over the horizon in
1995. For example, none of us in Beijing
could have imagined the ways in which
the internet and mobile technology
would transform our world or
comprehended what it would mean to
have 200 million fewer women than men
online in the developing world. Closing
that “digital divide” would open up vast
new opportunities for economic and
political participation.
Eventually we started calling our new
initiative No Ceilings: The Full
Participation Project. The name was a
playful echo of the “18 million cracks in
the glass ceiling” that became famous at
the end of my Presidential campaign, but
it meant much more than that. You didn’t
have to be at the highest levels of
politics or business; women and girls
everywhere still faced all sorts of
ceilings that held back their ambitions
and aspirations and made it harder, if not
impossible, for them to pursue their
dreams.
Not long after I announced No
Ceilings, I heard a surprising story.
Stephen Massey, a colleague from the
Clinton White House, happened to be in
Beijing and wandered into a bookstore.
It was a large and modern shop, but
quiet and nearly empty. Then Stephen
could hardly believe his ears. Over the
store’s loudspeakers he heard a familiar
phrase: “Human rights are women’s
rights and women’s rights are human
rights, once and for all.” It was my
voice. They were playing a recording of
the speech throughout the store. What a
difference twenty years makes! In 1995,
the Chinese government had shut down
the closed-circuit television feed
carrying my remarks. Now those
controversial words had become
“background music” for shoppers, part
of the fabric of everyday life. Stephen
whipped out his smartphone, recorded a
video, and emailed it home. When I saw
it, I had to laugh. Was that really a good
way to sell books? In China?
The message of Beijing and the
lifetime of work it represented had
become so much a part of my identity it
was practically written into my DNA. I
was glad that it had permeated into the
culture, in places that had once been
hostile. The cause of protecting and
expanding human rights is as urgent and
compelling as ever, and further progress
is unlikely without continued American
leadership.

In February 2014, the Human Rights
Campaign (the other HRC!) invited my
daughter, Chelsea, to speak at a
conference on gay rights. In her remarks
she offered a new twist on a familiar
phrase. “My mother has often said that
the issue of women is the unfinished
business of the 21st century,” she said.
“That is certainly true. But so too are the
issues of LGBTQ rights the unfinished
business of the 21st century.” Of course
she’s right, and I could not be more
proud of her strong stand on behalf of
equality and opportunity for all people.
Earlier I described the work of
American foreign policy as a relay race.
Leaders are handed the baton and asked
to run our leg as ably as we can and put
the next runner in the best possible
position to succeed. Well, families are
like that too. From the moment I first
held Chelsea in my arms in the hospital
in Little Rock, I knew my mission in life
was to give her every opportunity to
thrive. As she’s grown up and stepped
out into the world in her own right, my
responsibilities have changed. And now
that she’s expecting a child of her own,
I’m preparing for a new role that I’ve
looked forward to for years:
grandmother. And I’ve found myself
thinking a lot about my relationship with
my own mom, as an adult as well as in
childhood, and what lessons I learned
from her.
When I became Secretary of State,
Mom was just about to turn ninety. She
had been living with us in Washington
for the past few years, ever since being
alone in her apartment overlooking the
zoo on Connecticut Avenue became too
much. Like so many Americans of my
generation, I felt both blessed to have
these extra years with an aging parent
and very responsible for making sure she
was comfortable and well-cared for.
Mom gave me so much unconditional
love and support when I was growing up
in Park Ridge; now it was my turn to
support her. Of course I never would
have let her hear me describe it that
way. Dorothy Howell Rodham was a
fiercely independent woman. She
couldn’t bear the thought of being a
burden to anyone.
Having her so close became a source
of great comfort to me, especially in the
difficult period after the end of the 2008
campaign. I’d come home from a long
day at the Senate or the State
Department, slide in next to her at the
small table in our breakfast nook, and let
everything just pour out.
Mom loved mystery novels, Mexican
food, Dancing with the Stars (we
actually managed to get her to a taping of
the show once), and most of all her
grandchildren. My nephew Zach
Rodham’s school was just five minutes
away, and he came over many afternoons
to visit her. Spending time with Fiona
and Simon Rodham, her youngest
grandchildren, was a precious delight
for her. For Chelsea, her grandmother
was one of the most important figures in
her life. Mom helped Chelsea navigate
the unique challenges of growing up in
the public eye and, when she was ready,
encouraged her to pursue her passion for
service and philanthropy. Even in her
nineties, Mom never lost her
commitment to social justice, which did
so much to mold and inspire me when I
was growing up. I loved that she was
able to do the same for Chelsea. And I’m
not sure if I ever saw Mom happier than
at Chelsea’s wedding. She proudly
walked down the aisle on Zach’s arm
and exulted over her joyful, radiant
granddaughter.
Mom’s own childhood was marked by
trauma and abandonment. In Chicago her
parents fought frequently and divorced
when she and her sister were young.
Neither parent was willing to care for
the kids, so they were put on a train to
California to live with their paternal
grandparents in Alhambra, a town near
the San Gabriel Mountains east of Los
Angeles. The elderly couple was severe
and unloving. One Halloween, after
Mom was caught trick-or-treating with
school friends, a forbidden activity, she
was confined to her room for an entire
year, except for the hours she was in
school. She wasn’t allowed to eat at the
kitchen table or play in the yard. By the
time Mom turned fourteen, she could no
longer bear life in her grandmother’s
house. She moved out and found work as
a housekeeper and nanny for a kindhearted woman in San Gabriel who
offered room and board plus $3 a week
and urged her to attend high school. For
the first time she saw how loving parents
care for their children—it was a
revelation.
After graduating high school, Mom
moved back to Chicago in the hopes of
reconnecting with her own mother. Sadly
she was spurned yet again. Heartbroken,
she spent the next five years working as
a secretary before she met and married
my father, Hugh Rodham. She built a
new life as a homemaker, spending her
days lavishing love on me and my two
younger brothers.
When I got old enough to understand
all this, I asked my mother how she
survived abuse and abandonment
without becoming embittered and
emotionally stunted. How did she
emerge from this lonely early life as
such a loving and levelheaded woman?
I’ll never forget how she replied. “At
critical points in my life somebody
showed me kindness,” she said.
Sometimes it would seem so small, but it
would mean so much—the teacher in
elementary school who noticed that she
never had money to buy milk, so every
day would buy two cartons of milk and
then say, “Dorothy, I can’t drink this
other carton of milk. Would you like it?”
Or the woman who hired her as a nanny
and insisted that she go to high school.
One day she noticed that Mom had only
one blouse that she washed every day.
“Dorothy, I can’t fit into this blouse
anymore and I’d hate to throw it away.
Would you like it?” she said.
Mom was amazingly energetic and
positive even into her nineties. But her
health started to fail her; she had trouble
with her heart. By the fall of 2011, I was
growing worried about leaving her
alone. On the evening of October 31,
another Halloween, I was preparing to
leave for London and Turkey. My team
was already on board the airplane at
Andrews waiting for me to arrive so we
could take off. That’s when I got the call
that Mom had been rushed to George
Washington University Hospital. I
quickly canceled the trip and sped there.
Bill, Chelsea, and Marc rushed down
from New York, and my brothers and
their wives, Hugh and Maria and Tony
and Megan, arrived as quickly as they
could. Mom was a fighter her entire life,
but it was finally time to let go. I sat by
her bedside and held her hand one last
time. No one had a bigger influence on
my life or did more to shape the person I
became.
When I lost my father in 1993, it felt
too soon, and I was consumed with
sadness for all the things he would not
live to see and do. This was different.
Mom lived a long and full life. This time
I wept not for what she would miss but
for how much I would miss her.
I spent the next few days going
through her things at home, paging
through a book, staring at an old
photograph, caressing a piece of
beloved jewelry. I found myself sitting
next to her empty chair in the breakfast
nook and wishing more than anything that
I could have one more conversation, one
more hug.
We held a small memorial service at
the house with close family and friends.
We asked Reverend Bill Shillady, who
married Chelsea and Marc, to officiate.
Chelsea spoke movingly, as did many of
Mom’s friends and our family. I read a
few lines from the poet Mary Oliver,
whose work Mom and I both adored.
Standing there with Bill and Chelsea
by my side, I tried to say a final goodbye. I remembered a piece of wisdom
that an older friend of mine shared in her
later years that perfectly captured how
my mother lived her life and how I
hoped to live mine: “I have loved and
been loved; all the rest is background
music.”
I looked at Chelsea and thought about
how proud Mom was of her. Mom
measured her own life by how much she
was able to help us and serve others. I
knew if she was still with us, she would
be urging us to do the same. Never rest
on your laurels. Never quit. Never stop
working to make the world a better
place. That’s our unfinished business.
EPILOGUE

Where did Hillary go?” the President
asked, looking around. He was in the
middle of a short speech about
democracy in Burma, standing on the
porch of Aung San Suu Kyi’s house in
Rangoon. “Where is she?”
It was November 2012, and we were
on our final trip together as President
and Secretary of State. I waved from off
to the side and caught his eye. “There
she is,” he said. As he thanked me, I
thought about how far we had come from
that day more than four years earlier in
Dianne Feinstein’s living room. Like our
entire last trip together, it was a moment
of bittersweet nostalgia, of satisfaction
in what we had accomplished, delight in
the partners we had become, and
sadness that it would soon be over.
Just two weeks earlier the President
had won reelection. Unlike in 2008, this
time I hadn’t been able to campaign for
him. By law and tradition, Secretaries of
State stay out of domestic politics. The
Democratic National Convention in
Charlotte, North Carolina, was the first I
had missed since 1976. In 2008, the
convention in Denver had offered me a
chance to endorse President Obama and
help unify Democrats after the long
primary campaign. But during the 2012
convention I was half a world away,
representing our country on a diplomatic
mission to Asia.
On the night my husband addressed
the convention and formally nominated
the President, I was in Timor-Leste,
Asia’s newest country, which had won
its long struggle for independence from
Indonesia in 2002. After a day of
diplomacy in the capital of Dili, just
before flying to Brunei for a meeting and
dinner with Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah, I
stole away for a few private moments in
the residence of our Ambassador. There
was no CNN and only limited internet
bandwidth, but Philippe Reines had
managed to connect to his TiVo back in
Washington, so we could watch a
delayed recording of Bill’s just-
completed speech on the Ambassador’s
home computer. I sat down to watch
while the rest of my team crowded
behind me.
I had to smile when I saw him take the
stage in front of the enthusiastic crowd.
It had been sixteen years since Bill’s last
campaign, but he still loved the
excitement of a great political moment.
Like a country lawyer laying out the
facts for a jury, he explained how deeply
damaged our economy and global
standing had been in 2009 and how the
Obama Administration had begun turning
things around. At the end of his speech
he addressed the question of American
decline and renewal. “For more than
two hundred years, through every crisis,
we’ve always come back,” he said.
“People have predicted our demise ever
since George Washington was criticized
for being a mediocre surveyor with a
bad set of wooden false teeth. And so
far, every single person that’s bet against
America has lost money because we
always come back. We come through
every fire a little stronger and a little
better.” After Bill finished, President
Obama unexpectedly appeared onstage
to thank him. As the two Presidents
embraced, the crowd went wild.
Watching from some ten thousand miles
away, I was full of pride for the former
President I married, the current
President I served, and the country we
all loved.
After wrapping up our day in Burma,
President Obama and I boarded Air
Force One for the flight to Cambodia,
where we would attend the East Asia
Summit and ASEAN Leaders Meeting. It
would be another crucial test for our
pivot strategy. At the same time, the
conflict in Gaza between Israel and
Hamas was boiling over, and we had to
decide whether I would break off from
the trip to fly there to try to broker a
cease-fire. With so much to talk about,
the President asked me to join him in his
office at the front of Air Force One.
I sat in front of his large wooden desk
as we discussed the delicate diplomacy
ahead. Despite all that was going on, we
started reminiscing. These four years
had changed us in ways neither of us
could have predicted. We had seen and
done things together that helped us better
understand ourselves, each other, and the
world as we never could have before.
But even with all of our time together
I didn’t see coming what happened next.
“Would you consider staying on as
Secretary of State?” the President asked.
Ever since I had accepted the job, I
had told myself, “One term, that’s it,”
and had often said so publicly as well.
As much as I loved being Secretary of
State, I was looking forward to leaving
public life and spending more time with
my family, reconnecting with friends,
and doing the everyday things I missed.
It would be nice to stay in one time zone,
without having to add or subtract five,
ten, fourteen hours wherever I happened
to wake up.
But just like four years before, I felt
the tug of my “service gene,” that voice
telling me there is no higher calling or
more noble purpose than serving your
country. When the President of the
United States asks you to step up to the
plate, how can you say no? And there
was so much unfinished business. The
summit in Cambodia and the conflict in
Gaza were just two examples. What
would happen to democracy in Burma?
Or our secret negotiations with Iran?
How would we counter the growing
challenge from Putin in Russia?
But diplomacy is a relay race, and I
was nearing the end of my leg. “I’m
sorry, Mr. President,” I said. “But I
can’t.”

A few months later we said our goodbyes. I had lunch with President Obama
in his private dining room off the Oval
Office. Over fish tacos we discussed a
twenty-page memo I had prepared with
recommendations for his second term,
both building on what we had started
and new initiatives. On the way out we
paused in the Oval Office. Tearing up, I
hugged the President and told him again
how much our work and friendship
meant to me. And that I’d be on call if he
ever needed me.
On February 1, 2013, my final day in
Foggy Bottom, I sat down at the desk in
the small cherry-paneled inner office for
the last time and wrote John Kerry a
letter. I left it in the same place I had
found Condi’s note to me four years
before that. Then I signed my letter of
resignation to the President. For the first
time in twenty years, after serving as
First Lady, Senator, and Secretary of
State, I no longer had any role in
government.
My final act was to go down to the
lobby—where I had been greeted on my
first day back in 2009—to say good-bye
to the men and women of the State
Department and USAID. Thanking them
seemed inadequate for all their
dedicated service, but I did my best.
Once again I saw the marble walls with
the etched names of the colleagues we
had lost, those who had fallen serving
our country. I said a quiet prayer for
them and their families. Filling the large
lobby were so many people I had come
to love and respect. I was glad they
would continue serving the United States
with intelligence, persistence, and
courage.
In the coming years, Americans will
have to decide whether we are prepared
to learn from and call on the lessons of
our history and rise once more to defend
our values and interests. This is not a
summons to confrontation or to a new
Cold War—we’ve learned painfully that
force should be our last resort, never our
first. Instead, it’s an appeal to stand
firmly and united in pursuit of a more
just, free, and peaceful world. Only
Americans can decide this.
In the end, our strength abroad
depends on our resolve and resilience at
home. Citizens and leaders alike have
choices to make about the country we
want to live in and leave to the next
generation. Middle-class incomes have
been declining for more than a decade,
and poverty has increased as almost all
the benefits of growth have gone to those
at the very top. We need more good jobs
that reward hard work with rising
wages, dignity, and a ladder to a better
life. Investments to build a truly 21stcentury economy with more opportunity
and less inequality. An end to the
political dysfunction in Washington that
holds back our progress and demeans
our democracy. That means more of our
neighbors and fellow citizens must be
empowered to participate fully in both
our economy and our democracy. That is
the only way to restore the American
Dream and ensure our long-term
prosperity and continued global
leadership.
It won’t be easy to do that in our
current political atmosphere. But to
quote from one of my favorite movies, A
League of Their Own: “It’s supposed to
be hard. . . . The hard is what makes it
great.” Doing what’s hard will continue
to make our country great.

I wrote this book over the course of
2013 and early 2014, mostly from a
cozy, sun-drenched third-floor study in
our home in Chappaqua, New York.
There’s a thick carpet and a comfortable
chair, and I can look out through the
windows into the treetops. I finally had
time to read, catch up on sleep, go on
long walks with my husband and our
dogs, see more of my family, and think
about the future.
In early 2014, Bill and I got some
wonderful news that we’d been eagerly
waiting to hear: we were going to be
grandparents. We were both beyond
happy for Chelsea and Marc and
unabashedly giddy at the prospect. When
Chelsea was born, I was full of nerves
—despite all the books I had read and
my work at Yale’s Child Study Center, I
was unprepared for the sheer miracle
and responsibility of parenthood. I
prayed that I would be a good enough
mother and I quickly came to feel that
having a child is like letting “your heart
go walking around outside your body,”
as the writer Elizabeth Stone put it. It
was wonderful and terrifying all at the
same time. All these years later, as I
look forward to a grandchild, there is
nothing but excitement and anticipation.
And I recall what Margaret Mead said,
that children keep our imaginations fresh
and our hearts young, and drive us to
work for a better future.
Now, more than ever, the future is
very much on my mind. Over the past
year, as I’ve traveled around our country
once again, the one question I’m asked
more than any other is: Will I run for
President in 2016?
The answer is, I haven’t decided yet.
But whenever someone brings it up,
I’m honored by the energy and
enthusiasm of those encouraging me to
run, and even more by their belief that I
can provide the leadership our country
needs.
Right now I believe we should be
focused on the work to be done in our
country that can’t wait until 2016. Many
of our fellow Americans who were hit
hard by the Great Recession haven’t
recovered. Too many young people are
burdened with bigger student debt and
smaller job prospects. There’s also an
important election in 2014 that will
decide control of Congress and have
real consequences for our economy and
our future. It’s not one we can afford to
look past or sit out.
Recently, Bill and I took another of
our long walks, this time with our three
dogs, near our home. It had been an
unseasonably long winter, but spring
was finally peeking through the thaw.
We walked and talked, continuing a
conversation that began more than forty
years ago at Yale Law School and hasn’t
stopped yet.
We both know I have a big decision in
front of me.
Having run for President before, I
understand exactly how challenging it is
on every front—not only on candidates
but on their families as well. And having
lost in 2008, I know that nothing is
guaranteed, nothing can be taken for
granted. I also know that the most
important questions anyone considering
running must answer are not “Do you
want to be President?” or “Can you
win?” They are “What’s your vision for
America?” and “Can you lead us there?”
The challenge is to lead in a way that
unites us again and renews the American
Dream. That’s the bar, and it’s a high
one.
Ultimately, what happens in 2016
should be about what kind of future
Americans want for themselves and their
children—and grandchildren. I hope we
choose inclusive politics and a common
purpose to unleash the creativity,
potential, and opportunity that makes
America exceptional. That’s what all
Americans deserve.
Whatever I decide, I will always be
thankful for the chance to represent
America around the world. I have
learned anew the goodness of our people
and the greatness of our nation. I feel
blessed and grateful. Our future is so full
of possibility. And for me and my family
that includes looking forward to a new
addition—another American who
deserves the best possible future we can
offer.
But for this day, at least, I just wanted
to stretch my legs and enjoy the spring.
Everywhere around me there was new
life. There have been too few quiet
moments like this over the years. And I
want to savor them. The time for another
hard choice will come soon enough.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The motto of the Clinton Foundation is
“We’re all in this together.” It’s a simple
statement of unity in a world full of
division. As I’ve discovered, it’s also
an apt description of what it takes to
write a book. I’m indebted to everyone
who helped me through four years at the
State Department and more than a year
of writing and editing. And the easiest
choice I made was to ask Dan Schwerin,
Ethan Gelber, and Ted Widmer to
become my book team. I could not have
been more fortunate as we labored day
and night.
Dan Schwerin started with me in the
Senate and came to State as one of my
speechwriters. He’s been my essential
partner, toiling with me over phrases
and pages, capturing my thoughts and
helping me wrestle them into coherence.
He’s not only a talented writer, but also
a wonderful colleague. Ethan Gelber is
the “indispensable man” who managed a
sprawling writing and editing process,
making sense of my scribbles, clarifying
my memories, and keeping me sane as
the drafts piled up. I never could have
done it without him. Ted Widmer, an
accomplished historian and valued
collaborator, offered context and
perspective and a much-needed dose of
humor and humanity.
Huma Abedin, Cheryl Mills, Philippe
Reines, and Jake Sullivan, who gave so
much to me and to our country during our
years at the State Department, were
essential advisors, inspirers, and willing
fact-checkers throughout the process. I
also relied on the assistance and counsel
of Kurt Campbell, Lissa Muscatine, and
Megan Rooney, who generously read
drafts and offered advice.
Thanks to Simon & Schuster,
especially Chief Executive Officer
Carolyn Reidy and my publisher and
editor, Jonathan Karp. I’ve now done
five books with Carolyn, and it was
once again a delight. Jonathan, who
provided the right combination of
encouragement and criticism, has a well-
deserved reputation as a caring and
constructive editor. I also appreciate the
entire team: Irene Kheradi, Jonathan
Evans, Lisa Erwin, Pat Glynn, Gina
DiMascia, Ffej Caplan, Inge Maas,
Judith Hoover, Philip Bashe, Joy
O’Meara, Jackie Seow, Laura Wyss,
Nicholas Greene, Michael Selleck, Liz
Perl, Gary Urda, Colin Shields, Paula
Amendolara, Seth Russo, Lance
Fitzgerald, Marie Florio, Christopher
Lynch, David Hillman, Ellie Hirschhorn,
Adrian Norman, Sue Fleming, Adam
Rothberg, Jeff Wilson, Elina Vaysbeyn,
Cary Goldstein, Julia Prosser, and
Richard Rhorer.
Once again, I’m grateful to the
incomparable Bob Barnett, my attorney
and guide through the publishing world,
who was ably assisted by contract
attorney Michael O’Connor.
One of the best parts of writing this
book was the chance to reconnect and
reminisce with friends and colleagues.
My thanks to everyone who shared
memories, notes, and perspectives,
including Caroline Adler, Dan Baer,
Kris Balderston, De’Ara Balenger,
Jeremy Bash, Dan Benaim, Dan
Benjamin, Jarrett Blanc, Johnnie Carson,
Sarah Davey, Alex Djerassi, Bob
Einhorn, Dan Feldman, Jeff Feltman,
David Hale, Amos Hochstein, Fred Hof,
Sarah Hurwitz, Jim Kennedy, Caitlin
Klevorick, Ben Kobren, Harold Koh,
Dan Kurtz-Phelan, Capricia Marshall,
Mike McFaul, Judith McHale, George
Mitchell, Dick Morningstar, Carlos
Pascual, Nirav Patel, John Podesta,
Mike Posner, Ben Rhodes, Alec Ross,
Dennis Ross, Frank Ruggiero, Heather
Samuelson, Tom Shannon, Andrew
Shapiro, Anne-Marie Slaughter, Todd
Stern, Puneet Talwar, Tomicah
Tilleman, Melanne Verveer, Matthew
Walsh, and Ashley Woolheater. Also to
Clarence Finney and his industrious
archivists, and John Hackett, Chuck
Daris, Alden Fahy, Behar Godani, Paul
Hilburn, Chaniqua Nelson, and the
careful reviewers at the State
Department and the National Security
Council.
I was fortunate to serve alongside a
committed senior team: Deputy
Secretaries of State Bill Burns, Jack
Lew, Tom Nides, and Jim Steinberg,
Ambassador to the UN Susan Rice,
USAID Administrator Raj Shah, Global
AIDS Coordinator Eric Goosby, MCC
CEO Daniel Yohannes, and OPIC
President and CEO Elizabeth Littlefield.
I will always have a special place in
my heart for the entire “S Family,”
pictured in photo 10, the dedicated
Foreign Service officers and civil
servants who take such great care of
Secretaries, including Nima
Abbaszadeh, Daniella Ballou-Aares,
Courtney Beale, Christopher Bishop,
Claire Coleman, Jen Davis, Linda
Dewan, Sheila Dyson, Dan Fogarty,
Lauren Jiloty, Brock Johnson, Neal
Larkins, Joanne Laszczych, Laura Lucas,
Joe Macmanus, Lori McLean,
Bernadette Meehan, Lawrence
Randolph, Maria Sand, Jeannemarie
Smith, Zia Syed, Nora Toiv, and Alice
Wells, as well as the Executive
Secretariat and the incredible Line team.
Thanks to the senior leadership of the
State Department, USAID, PEPFAR, and
MCC, including Dave Adams, Tom
Adams, Elizabeth Bagley, Joyce Barr,
Rick Barton, John Bass, Bob Blake, Eric
Boswell, Esther Brimmer, Bill
Brownfield, Susan Burk, Piper
Campbell, Philip Carter, Maura
Connelly, Michael Corbin, Tom
Countryman, Heidi Crebo-Rediker, PJ
Crowley, Lou CdeBaca, Ivo Daalder,
Josh Daniel, Glyn Davies, Eileen
Donahoe-Chamberlain, Jose Fernandez,
Alonzo Fulgham, Phil Goldberg, David
Goldwyn, Phil Gordon, Rose
Gottemoeller, Marc Grossman, Michael
Hammer, Lorraine Hariton, Judy
Heumann, Christopher Hill, Bob
Hormats, Rashad Hussain, Janice
Jacobs, Roberta Jacobson, Bonnie
Jenkins, Suzan Johnson Cook, Kerri-Ann
Jones, Beth Jones, Paul Jones, Declan
Kelly, Ian Kelly, Laura Kennedy, Pat
Kennedy, Robert King, Reta Jo Lewis,
Carmen Lomellin, Princeton Lyman,
Dawn McCall, Ken Merten, Steve Mull,
Toria Nuland, Maria Otero, Farah
Pandith, Nancy Powell, Lois Quam,
Stephen Rapp, Julissa Reynoso, Anne
Richard, John Robinson, Miguel
Rodriguez, Hannah Rosenthal, Eric
Schwartz, Barbara Shailor, Wendy
Sherman, Dan Smith, Tara Sonenshine,
Don Steinberg, Karen Stewart, Ann
Stock, Ellen Tauscher, Linda ThomasGreenfield, Arturo Valenzuela, Rich
Verma, Phil Verveer, Jake Walles,
Pamela White, and Paul Wohlers.
I want especially to single out the
brave and dedicated Diplomatic
Security officers who kept me and our
people safe around the world. During my
tenure, my DS teams were led by Fred
Ketchum and Kurt Olsson.
Throughout this journey, a committed
band of tireless aides and advisors has
supported the book and all the rest of my
work while I raced to finish. Thanks to
Monique Aiken, Brynne Craig, Katie
Dowd, Oscar Flores, Monica Hanley,
Jen Klein, Madhuri Kommareddi, Yerka
Jo, Marisa McAuliffe, Terri
McCullough, Nick Merrill, Patti Miller,
Thomas Moran, Ann O’Leary, Maura
Pally, Shilpa Pesaru, Robert Russo,
Marina Santos, Lona Valmoro, and
Rachel Vogelstein.
Thanks again to President Obama for
putting his trust in me and giving me the
chance to represent our country, and to
Vice President Biden and the National
Security Council staff for their
partnership.
Finally, thanks, as always, to Bill and
Chelsea for a year’s worth of patient
listening and careful reading of draft
after draft, helping me distill and explain
four jam-packed years. Once again, they
gave me the invaluable gifts of their
support and love.
INDEX

Abbas, Mahmoud (Abu Mazen):
s Arafat’s successor, ref1, ref2
nd cease-fire, ref1
Chris Stevens remembered by, ref1
nd Gaza, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Goldstone Report, ref1
nd Palestinian statehood, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd peace process, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
nd settlement construction, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
nd West Bank, ref1, ref2
Abbaszadeh, Nima, ref1
Abdelfattah, Ragaei Said, ref1
Abdullah, Abdullah, ref1, ref2
Abdullah, King of Saudi Arabia, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5
Abdullah II, King of Jordan, ref1, ref2, ref3
Abe, Shinzo, ref1
Abedin, Huma, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
Abedin, Saleha, ref1
Aboul Gheit, Ahmed, ref1, ref2
Acheson, Dean, ref1, ref2
Acheson, Eldie, ref1
Action Group on Syria, ref1
Adams, Dave, ref1
Adams, Gerry, ref1
Adams, Henry, ref1
Adams, Tom, ref1
Adler, Caroline, ref1
Afghan High Peace Council, ref1
Afghanistan:
nd al Qaeda, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
Bush Administration focus on, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
Coalition forces in, ref1, ref2, ref3
COIN in, ref1
Constitution of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
orruption in, ref1, ref2
conomic development in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nding war in, ref1, ref2, ref3
eography of, ref1
nternational conferences on, ref1, ref2
nternational contact group in, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3
ation-building in, ref1
NATO forces in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
Northern Alliance in, ref1, ref2
Northern Distribution Network, ref1
akistani border with, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
oviet withdrawal from (1989), ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
pecial Operations in, ref1
upply lines to, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
aliban in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
errorism in, ref1, ref2
ade with Pakistan, ref1
aining local soldiers in, ref1, ref2
ansition in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
oops coming home from, ref1, ref2, ref3
oop surges in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
USAID in, ref1
U.S.–led invasion of, ref1, ref2
U.S. security interests in, ref1
war in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11
women’s rights sought in, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
Afghan National Security Forces, ref1,
ref2, ref3
AFL-CIO, ref1
Af-Pak, ref1; see also Afghanistan;
Pakistan
Africa, ref1
griculture in, ref1
nd China, ref1, ref2, ref3
onflict and chaos in, ref1
orruption in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd democracy, ref1, ref2, ref3
conomic growth in, ref1
HIV/AIDS in, ref1, ref2, ref3
atural resources in, ref1
nd resource curse, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2
wildlife trafficking in, ref1, ref2, ref3
women’s work in, ref1
ee also specific nations
African Growth and Opportunity Act
(AGOA), ref1
African Union, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Somalia, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd South Sudan, ref1
urveillance drones of, ref1
Agha-Soltan, Neda, ref1
Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Aiken, Monique, ref1
Air Force One, ref1, ref2
Ai Weiwei, ref1
Akihito, Emperor of Japan, ref1
Alaska:
nd global warming, ref1, ref2, ref3
urchase of, ref1
Albright, Madeleine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Algeria, jobs in, ref1, ref2
Ali, Nujood, ref1
Aliyev, Ilham, ref1
Al Jazeera, ref1, ref2, ref3
Alliance of Small Island States, ref1
Al-Nahyan, Crown Prince Mohammed bin
Zayed, ref1
Al-Nahyan, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed
(AbZ), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
l Qaeda, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
ounterterrorism against, ref1
rone strikes against, ref1
nd Islamist extremists, ref1
idnapping for ransom, ref1
n Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd propaganda, ref1
nd September 11 attacks, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
nd “Sunni Awakening,” ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2
nd Taliban, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
U.S. embassies bombed (1998) by, ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
U.S. intelligence about, ref1
Al Shabaab, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
l-Zawahiri, Ayman, ref1
Amado, Luís, ref1
Amendolara, Paula, ref1
American Airlines, ref1
American Israel Public Affairs Committee,
ref1
Americans with Disabilities Act, ref1
Amorim, Celso, ref1, ref2
Amr, Mohamed, ref1, ref2, ref3
Angola, oil from, ref1, ref2
Annan, Kofi, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Ansar al-Sharia, ref1, ref2
APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation), ref1, ref2, ref3
Aquino, Benigno III, ref1
Arab Human Development Report, ref1
Arab-Israeli War (1948), ref1
Arab League, ref1
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
Arab Peace Initiative (2002), ref1, ref2
Arab Spring, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
nd Persian Gulf nations, ref1
rotests in Egypt, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
rotests in Tunisia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
nd transitions to democracy, ref1
U.S. policy debates in, ref1, ref2
Arafat, Yasser, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Arctic Circle:
melting glaciers, ref1, ref2
rotection of, ref1
nd Russia, ref1, ref2
Arctic Council, ref1
Arias, Óscar, ref1
Aris, Michael, ref1
Armenia:
nd Azerbaijan, ref1, ref2
ndependence of, ref1
nd Turkey, ref1
ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian
Nations), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
U.S.–ASEAN Leaders Meeting, ref1
ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation,
ref1
Ashton, Cathy, ref1, ref2, ref3
Asia-Pacific region:
China’s roles in, ref1, ref2
nd democracy, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ndia’s role in, ref1
ationalism in, ref1
ivot in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
s priority, ref1, ref2, ref3
erritorial disputes in, ref1, ref2
nd TPP, ref1, ref2
ade in, ref1, ref2
unami (2004), ref1, ref2
U.S. leadership role in, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
ee also specific nations
Asia Society, New York, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
Aso, Taro, ref1
Assad, Bashar al-, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Arab League, ref1
nd chemical weapons, ref1, ref2
anian support for, ref1, ref2, ref3
Russian support for, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
treet protests against, ref1, ref2
nd transition, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
Assad, Hafez al-, ref1, ref2
Assange, Julian, ref1
Astor, Jacob and Ava, ref1
Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal, ref1, ref2
Aung San, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Australia:
nd China, ref1
U.S. alliance with, ref1
Azerbaijan, ref1, ref2

Bachelet, Michelle, ref1, ref2
Bader, Jeff, ref1
Baer, Dan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Bagley, Elizabeth, ref1
Bahrain, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Arab Spring, ref1
nd Qatar, ref1
Baker, James A. III, ref1, ref2
Balderston, Kris, ref1, ref2
Balenger, De’Ara, ref1
Balkans, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Ballou-Aares, Daniella, ref1
Banda, Joyce, ref1
Bangladesh:
nd climate change, ref1
echnology in, ref1
worker rights in, ref1
Ban Ki-moon, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Barak, Ehud, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
Barnett, Bob, ref1
Barnich, Terry, ref1
Barr, Joyce, ref1
Barroso, José Manuel, ref1
Bartholomew, Patriarch, ref1
Barton, Rick, ref1
Bash, Jeremy, ref1
Bashe, Philip, ref1
Bashir, Omar al-, ref1
Bass, John, ref1
Bauer, Shane, ref1, ref2
Bayh, Evan, ref1
BBC World Service, ref1
Beale, Courtney, ref1
Beauvoir, Max, ref1
Bedouin tribes, in Sinai, ref1
Begin, Menachem, ref1
Bellerive, Jean-Max, ref1
Ben Ali, Zine el Abidine, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6
Benghazi, see Libya
Benaim, Dan, ref1
Benjamin, Dan, ref1, ref2, ref3
Bergdahl, Bowe, ref1
Berlin Wall, fall of, ref1
Berlusconi, Silvio, ref1, ref2
Bhutto, Benazir, ref1, ref2
ssassination of, ref1, ref2
Daughter of Destiny, ref1
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, ref1
Biden, Joe, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd campaigns, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Middle East, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Russia, ref1, ref2
nd Vice Presidency, ref1, ref2
Bildt, Carl, ref1
in Abdulaziz al-Saud, Prince Saud alFaisal, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
in Laden, Osama:
CIA’s location of, ref1, ref2
eath of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd drone strikes, ref1
EAL operation against, ref1, ref2
earch for, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd September 11 attacks, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3
Bishop, Christopher, ref1
Blair, Tony, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Blake, Bob, ref1
Blake, Stephen, ref1, ref2
Blanc, Jarrett, ref1
Boehner, John, ref1
Boeing Aviation, ref1
Bolkiah, Sultan Hassanal, ref1
Bombardier, ref1
Bono, ref1, ref2
Borisov, Boyko, ref1
Bosnia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Boswell, Eric, ref1
Botswana, ref1
Bouazizi, Mohamed, ref1
Bouteflika, Abdelaziz, ref1
Boxer, Barbara, ref1
Bo Xilai, ref1, ref2
Brahimi, Lakhdar, ref1, ref2
Brazil:
iofuels in, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3
conomic growth in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nancial crisis in, ref1
nd Iran, ref1
middle class in, ref1
nd UN, ref1, ref2
Brennan, John, ref1, ref2
Brimmer, Esther, ref1
Britain, see United Kingdom
Brothers to the Rescue, ref1
Brown, Gordon, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Brownfield, Bill, ref1
Bryson, John, ref1
Bulgaria, ref1, ref2
Burk, Susan, ref1
Burma, ref1
nd China, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd democracy, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
oreign investment in, ref1
eography of, ref1
overnment reforms in, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2, ref3
ndependence of, ref1, ref2
nd India, ref1
rawaddy River in, ref1
Myitsone Dam project in, ref1
ationalism in, ref1
nd North Korea, ref1, ref2, ref3
resident Obama’s visit to, ref1
rogress in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
eligious discrimination in, ref1
anctions against, ref1, ref2, ref3
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2, ref3
n World War II, ref1
Burns, Bill, ref1
nd Asia-Pacific, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Benghazi, ref1, ref2
nd Gaza cease-fire, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Russia, ref1
Bush, Barbara, ref1, ref2
Bush, George H. W., ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Bush, George W., ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd compassionate conservatism, ref1
nd Haiti, ref1
nd PEPFAR, ref1, ref2
nd September 11 attacks, ref1
Bush, Laura, ref1, ref2
Bush Administration (W.), ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6
nd development programs, ref1
nd Europe, ref1, ref2
aq as focus of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
nd Israel, ref1, ref2
nd Latin America, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd “Pathways to Prosperity,” ref1
nd Russia, ref1, ref2
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd trade, ref1, ref2
Bush Doctrine, ref1
Byrd, Robert, ref1

Cairo (dog), ref1
Calderón, Felipe, ref1, ref2, ref3
Cambodia:
Hillary Clinton’s visit to, ref1
uman trafficking in, ref1
estrictions in, ref1
working conditions in, ref1
Cameron, David, ref1, ref2, ref3
Cameroon, ref1
Campbell, Kurt, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Burma, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd Chen, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
Campbell, Piper, ref1
Camp David Accords, ref1
Canada:
nd Arctic Council, ref1, ref2
nd climate change, ref1, ref2
nd electricity, ref1
irst Nations in, ref1, ref2
nd NATO, ref1
nd Pacific Alliance, ref1
ade with, ref1, ref2
Caplan, Ffej, ref1
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, ref1, ref2,
ref3
Carson, Johnnie, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Carter, Ashton, ref1
Carter, Jimmy, ref1, ref2
Carter, Philip, ref1
Carter, Rosalynn, ref1
Caspian Sea, natural gas in, ref1
Castro, Fidel, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Castro, Raul, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
CdeBaca, Lou, ref1, ref2
Center for Strategic Counterterrorism
Communications, ref1, ref2
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), ref1
Central African Republic, coup in, ref1
Chavez, Hugo, ref1, ref2, ref3
Chechnya, ref1
Chemical Weapons Convention (1993),
ref1
Chen Guangcheng, ref1, ref2, ref3
Chiang Kai-shek, ref1
Children’s Defense Fund, ref1, ref2, ref3
Chile:
nd Cuba, ref1
emocracy in, ref1
arthquake in, ref1
conomic growth in, ref1
nd electricity, ref1
nd Pacific Alliance, ref1
China, ref1
nd Africa, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd AIDS, ref1
ntidemocratic movement in, ref1
ntipollution protests in, ref1
nd Arctic research, ref1
ssertiveness of, ref1, ref2
nd Burma, ref1, ref2, ref3
ensorship in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Chen, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
emographic crisis in, ref1
conomic growth of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd energy, ref1, ref2, ref3
oreign policy of, ref1, ref2
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
nvestments in developing nations, ref1
nvestments in U.S., ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
abor issues in, ref1
nd Laos, ref1
nd Libya, ref1
middle class in, ref1
nd Mongolia, ref1, ref2, ref3
National Museum, ref1
Nixon in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd North Korea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd pollution, ref1
ostal laws of, ref1
eligious discrimination in, ref1
se of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd Russia, ref1, ref2
nd South China Sea, ref1, ref2, ref3
overeignty of, ref1
tate capitalism in, ref1, ref2
trategic and Economic Dialogue with,
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd technology, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Tibet, ref1
ade with, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
USA Pavilion in, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12
U.S. students in, ref1
nd women’s rights, ref1, ref2, ref3
Christopher, Warren M., ref1, ref2, ref3
Churchill, Winston, ref1
CIA:
nd Benghazi attacks, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
nd bin Laden, ref1, ref2
nd counterterrorism, ref1, ref2
fficers’ deaths in line of duty, ref1
ivil rights, ref1, ref2
Clapper, James, ref1, ref2, ref3
Clark, Wesley, ref1
Climate Action Plan, ref1
Climate and Clean Air Coalition, ref1
limate change, ref1
ap-and-trade, ref1
nd consumption levels, ref1
Copenhagen conference on (2009), ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
enying, ref1
nd emerging powers, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd energy generation, ref1
nd greenhouse gas emissions, ref1
nd island nations, ref1, ref2, ref3
Kyoto Accord, ref1, ref2, ref3
aris conference (2015), ref1
nd quality of life, ref1
nd rising sea levels, ref1
uper pollutants, ref1, ref2
U.S. leadership in, ref1, ref2, ref3
Clinton, Bill, ref1
nd Africa, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd “building back better,” ref1
nd campaigns, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
nd China, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Colombia, ref1
nd development programs, ref1, ref2
nd Haiti, ref1
nd Holbrooke, ref1
nd Hillary Clinton’s speeches, ref1, ref2
nd Hillary Clinton as Secretary of State,
ref1, ref2
nd Hurricane Katrina, ref1
nd Kyoto Accord, ref1
nd McGovern campaign (1972), ref1
nd Middle East, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd national security, ref1
nd Northern Ireland, ref1
nd North Korea, ref1
eelection of, ref1
nd September 11 attacks, ref1
tatue in Kosovo, ref1
nd Suu Kyi, ref1
nd Vietnam, ref1
wedding of Hillary Clinton and, ref1
Clinton, Chelsea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
nd Bhutto, ref1, ref2, ref3
ay rights speech of, ref1
nd her grandmother, ref1, ref2
nd Mandela, ref1, ref2
wedding of, ref1, ref2, ref3
work ethic of, ref1
Clinton, Hillary Rodham:
America’s Pacific Century,” ref1
nd Democratic Conventions, ref1, ref2,
ref3
s First Lady, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12,
ref13, ref14
nd Gaza cease-fire, ref1, ref2
nd grandparenthood, ref1
n individual negotiations, see specific
names
earning from defeat, ref1, ref2
major speeches by, see Clinton, Hillary
Rodham, speeches
nd McGovern campaign (1972), ref1
nd nuclear arms treaty, ref1
nd presidential races (2008), ref1, ref2,
ref3; (2016), ref1
nd primaries (2008), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
s Secretary of State, see Secretary of
State, U.S.
s Senator, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12,
ref13, ref14, ref15, ref16, ref17
nd September 11 attacks, ref1
avels of, see specific nations
wedding of Bill and, ref1
nd wildlife trafficking, ref1, ref2
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, speeches:
n Afghan peace prospects, ref1, ref2
n Africa, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
t Asia Society, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
n Benghazi attack, ref1, ref2
n counterterrorism, ref1
n democracy, ref1
n free markets, ref1, ref2
Globalization into the Next Millennium,”
ref1
n human rights, ref1, ref2
n internet freedom, ref1
n Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2
n Latin America, ref1
n LGBT, ref1
n Middle East challenges, ref1, ref2, ref3
t Munich Security Conference, ref1
ominating Obama, ref1, ref2
n Northern Ireland, ref1
o primary campaign staff (2008), ref1
t World Conference on Women, Beijing,
ref1, ref2, ref3
t World Economic Forum, Davos (1998),
ref1
Clinton Administration:
nd al Qaeda, ref1
conomic plan of, ref1
nd gun control, ref1
nd Latin America, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd NATO, ref1
nd North Korea, ref1
ee also Clinton, Bill
Clinton Foundation, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Clinton Global Initiative, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI),
ref1, ref2
Cohen, David, ref1
Cohen, Jared, ref1
COIN, ref1, ref2
Cold War, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11
nd Cuba, ref1, ref2, ref3
omino theory in, ref1
nd of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
oreign policy in, ref1, ref2
deological struggle of, ref1
onaligned movement in, ref1
Coleman, Claire, ref1
Collins, Susan, ref1, ref2
Colombia, ref1
mass transit in, ref1
nd Pacific Alliance, ref1
lan Colombia, ref1, ref2
nd pollution, ref1
ade agreement with, ref1, ref2
Community of Democracies, ref1
Congo (DRC), ref1
Congress, U.S.:
nd children with disabilities, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd counterterrorism, ref1
nd debt default, ref1
nd funding, ref1, ref2
nd immigration laws, ref1
nd land bomb removal, ref1
versight role of, ref1
olitical brinksmanship in, ref1, ref2
Connelly, Maura, ref1
ookstoves, ref1
Corbin, Michael, ref1
Corker, Bob, ref1
Corning, ref1
Costa Rica, hydropower in, ref1
Côte d’Ivoire, ref1, ref2
Countryman, Tom, ref1
Craig, Brynne, ref1
Crebo-Rediker, Heidi, ref1
Cretz, Gene, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Crimea, Russian invasion of, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Crocker, Ryan, ref1, ref2
Crouse, Timothy, ref1
Crowley, Joe, ref1
Crowley, PJ, ref1
Cuba, ref1, ref2
nd Cold War, ref1, ref2, ref3
Damas de Blanco (“Ladies in White”) in,
ref1
mbargo against, ref1
nd OAS, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2
Cui Tiankai, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

Daalder, Ivo, ref1
Dačić, Ivica, ref1
Dai Bingguo, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Chen, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Iran, ref1, ref2
Dalai Lama, ref1
Daniel, Josh, ref1
Darfur, genocide in, ref1, ref2
Daris, Chuck, ref1
Davey, Sarah, ref1
Davies, Glyn, ref1
Davies, Glyn, ref1
Davis, Jen, ref1
Davutoğlu, Ahmet, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Dayton Peace Accords, ref1
e Klerk, F. W., ref1
DeLong, Victoria, ref1
Democratic National Conventions:
1992), ref1, ref2
1996), ref1
2004), ref1
2008), ref1, ref2, ref3
2012), ref1
Democratic Party: party unity in, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
ref1
Dempsey, Martin, ref1, ref2, ref3
Deng Xiaoping, ref1, ref2, ref3
Denmark, ref1
Dewan, Linda, ref1
DiMascia, Gina, ref1
Diplomatic Security Service, ref1, ref2
Direct Line, ref1
isabilities, people with, ref1
Djerassi, Alex, ref1
Dlamini-Zuma, Nkosazana, ref1
Doctors Without Borders, ref1, ref2
Doe, Samuel, ref1
Doherty, Glen, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Dole, Bob, ref1
Dolo, Adolphus (“General Peanut Butter”),
ref1
Dominican Republic, ref1, ref2
Donahoe-Chamberlain, Eileen, ref1
Donilon, Tom, ref1, ref2
nd Benghazi, ref1, ref2
nd Egypt, ref1, ref2
nd Gaza, ref1
nd Latin America, ref1
nd National Security Council, ref1, ref2,
ref3
nd Omani back channel, ref1
Dorsey, Jack, ref1
Dougherty, Jill, ref1
Dowd, Katie, ref1
Duvalier, “Baby Doc,” ref1
Dyson, Sheila, ref1

agleburger, Lawrence, ref1
ast Africa, U.S. embassies bombed in
(1998), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ast China Sea, ref1, ref2, ref3
delman, Marian Wright, ref1
gypt:
Coptic Christians in, ref1, ref2, ref3
isorganization in, ref1
lections in, ref1, ref2
Hillary Clinton’s travels to, ref1, ref2
nnocence of Muslims aired in, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
military rule in, ref1
nd Muslim Brotherhood, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
eaceful protests in, ref1, ref2
nd terrorism, ref1
ansition sought for, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
U.S. relationship with, ref1
iolent protests in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
inhorn, Bob, ref1, ref2, ref3
isenhower Administration, ref1
kho Moskvy, ref1
lbegdorj, Tsakhiagiin, ref1
lizabeth II, queen of England, ref1
l-Keib, Abdurrahim, ref1
llsberg, Daniel, ref1
l Salvador, ref1, ref2, ref3
manuel, Rahm, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nergy, ref1
nd cookstoves, ref1
nd economics, ref1
lectricity, ref1, ref2, ref3
xtraction practices, ref1
nd jobs, ref1
nd resource curse, ref1, ref2
nergy and Climate Partnership of the
Americas, ref1
ngole, John Robert, ref1
nriquez, Lesley, ref1
ntebbe raid (1976), ref1
nvironmental Protection Agency (EPA),
ref1, ref2
rdoğan, Recep Tayyip, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
rwin, Lisa, ref1
spinosa, Patricia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
urasian Union, ref1
uropean Union, ref1, ref2
nd Afghanistan, ref1
nd Balkans, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2
nergy sources for, ref1
nd financial crisis, ref1, ref2
nd Iran, ref1
nd NATO, ref1, ref2, ref3
Nobel Peace Prize to, ref1
nd the Quartet, ref1
nd Turkey, ref1
nd Ukraine, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1
vans, Jonathan, ref1
xport-Import Bank, ref1

abius, Laurent, ref1, ref2
ahy, Alden, ref1
air Labor Association, ref1
allows, James, ref1
ang Lizhi, ref1
ARC, ref1
armer, Paul, ref1
attal, Joshua, ref1, ref2
ayyad, Salam, ref1
ederal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), ref1
edEx, ref1
eed the Future, ref1
eingold, Russ, ref1, ref2
einstein, Dianne, ref1, ref2
eldman, Dan, ref1, ref2, ref3
eltman, Jeff, ref1, ref2, ref3
ernandez, Jose, ref1
EST (Foreign Emergency Support Team),
ref1
inland, ref1
inny, Clarence, ref1
irst Amendment, ref1
irst Nations, ref1, ref2
itzgerald, Lance, ref1
leming, Sue, ref1
lores, Oscar, ref1
lorio, Marie, ref1
lournoy, Michèle, ref1, ref2
ogarty, Dan, ref1
oley, Tom, ref1
ord, Betty, ref1
ord, Gerald R., ref1
ord, Robert, ref1
oreign Policy (magazine), ref1
orum for the Future, ref1, ref2
ox, Vicente, ref1
rance:
nd Iran, ref1
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Syria, ref1
nd Turkey, ref1
U.S. soldiers buried in, ref1
ranklin, Benjamin, ref1
reedom House, ref1, ref2
riends of the Syrian People, ref1, ref2,
ref3
roman, Mike, ref1
u, Bob, ref1
ulgham, Alonzo, ref1
unes, Mauricio, ref1

G-7, ref1
G-8, ref1, ref2
Gandhi, Sonia, ref1
Gao Yaojie, ref1
García Márquez, Gabriel, ref1
Gates, Robert M.:
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
nd bin Laden operation, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd counterterrorism, ref1
s Defense Secretary, ref1
nd Egypt, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Libya, ref1, ref2
nd North Korea, ref1, ref2
Gates Foundation, ref1, ref2
Gaza Strip, ref1, ref2, ref3
ease-fire negotiated in, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
lections in, ref1
round invasion threatened, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
Hamas in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
umanitarian aid in, ref1
sraeli air strikes into, ref1, ref2
sraeli siege of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
nd Qatar, ref1, ref2
ockets fired from, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
weapons smuggling into, ref1
ero hour in, ref1, ref2
Gazprom, ref1, ref2
Gbowee, Leymah, ref1
Gehry, Frank, ref1
Geithner, Tim, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Gelber, Ethan, ref1
General Electric (GE), ref1, ref2, ref3
Geneva Protocol (1925), ref1
Genghis Khan, ref1
Georgia:
Russian invasion of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
errorism in, ref1
Germany:
Berlin Wall in, ref1
nd global financial crisis, ref1
nd Syria, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1
Ghana:
nd climate change, ref1
resident Obama’s trip to, ref1
Ghattas, Kim, ref1
Gibbs, Robert, ref1, ref2, ref3
Gilani, Yousaf Raza, ref1
Gillard, Julia, ref1, ref2
Giuliani, Rudy, ref1
GLIFAA (Gays and Lesbians in Foreign
Affairs Agencies), ref1
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves,
ref1
Global Counterterrorism Forum, ref1, ref2
lobal economy:
ollar as reserve currency, ref1
n emerging economies, ref1
nd energy, ref1
ee markets in, ref1
nternational trade, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
middle class, ref1
nd U.S. debt default, ref1
U.S. exports, ref1
nd workers’ rights, ref1
Global Security Contingency Fund, ref1
Global Trends 2025: A Transformed
World (NIC), ref1
lobal warming, see climate change
Glynn, Pat, ref1
Godani, Behar, ref1
Goldberg, Phil, ref1
Goldstein, Cary, ref1
Goldstone, Richard, ref1
Goldwyn, David, ref1
Goodwin, Doris Kearns, ref1
Google, ref1
Goosby, Eric, ref1, ref2
Gorbachev, Mikhail, ref1
Gordon, Phil, ref1, ref2
Gore, Al, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Gore, Tipper, ref1
Gottemoeller, Rose, ref1, ref2
Graham, Lindsey, ref1, ref2
Greeley, Horace, ref1
Greene, Nicholas, ref1
Gross, Alan, ref1
Grossman, Marc, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Guantánamo Bay, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Guinea-Bissau, coup in, ref1
Gül, Abdullah, ref1, ref2
Gulf Cooperation Council, ref1, ref2, ref3
Gulf War (1991), ref1, ref2, ref3
Habib, Bubaker, ref1
Hackett, John, ref1
Haddad, Essam al-, ref1
Hague, William, ref1, ref2, ref3
Haiti, ref1
griculture in, ref1, ref2
Caracol project in, ref1, ref2
nd democracy, ref1
evelopment plan for, ref1, ref2
arthquake in, ref1, ref2, ref3
lections in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
overty in, ref1, ref2
efugees from, ref1
overeignty of, ref1
UN mission in, ref1, ref2
USAID in, ref1, ref2, ref3
oodoo in, ref1
Hale, David, ref1
Hamas, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
Hammer, Michael, ref1
Haniya, Ismail, ref1
Hanley, Monica, ref1
Hanssen, Robert, ref1
Hariri, Rafic, ref1, ref2
Hariri, Saad, ref1, ref2
Hariton, Lorraine, ref1
Harney, Kenneth, ref1
Harper, Stephen, ref1
Harris, Harry, ref1
Haughey, Sharon, ref1
Havel, Václav, ref1, ref2
Hayes, Jeff, ref1
HEAL Africa, ref1
Heaney, Seamus, ref1
Helms, Jesse, ref1
Helsinki Accords, ref1
Henley, William Ernest, “Invictus,” ref1
Heumann, Judy, ref1
Hezbollah:
n Iran, ref1, ref2
srael attacked by, ref1, ref2, ref3
n Lebanon, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
n Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
Hicks, Greg, ref1, ref2
Hilburn, Paul, ref1
Hill, Christopher, ref1
Hillman, David, ref1
Hirschhorn, Ellie, ref1
Hochstein, Amos, ref1
Hof, Fred, ref1
Holbrooke, Richard, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Afghanistan/Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12, ref13
nd Bosnia, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Dayton Peace Accords, ref1
eath of, ref1
eart attack of, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2
o End a War, 150
Holder, Eric, ref1, ref2
Hollande, François, ref1
Honduras:
lections in, ref1, ref2
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2, ref3
uster of Zelaya in, ref1
Hong Kong:
nd international trade, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd internet communication, ref1
Hoover, Judith, ref1
Hormats, Bob, ref1
Hu Jintao, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Iran, ref1, ref2
nd transition, ref1, ref2
nd U.S.–China relationship, ref1, ref2
uman rights, ref1
ivil rights, ref1, ref2
nd Helsinki Accords, ref1
uman trafficking, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd “invisibles,” ref1
GBT, ref1
eople with disabilities, ref1
eligious freedom, ref1
tate Department reports on, ref1, ref2
nd UN, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8
Universal Declaration, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5
women’s rights, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
workers’ rights, ref1, ref2
Human Rights Campaign, ref1
Human Rights Watch, ref1
Hungarian Revolution, ref1
Huntsman, Jon, ref1
Hurricane Katrina, ref1, ref2
Hurwitz, Sarah, ref1
Hussain, Rashad, ref1
Hussein, Saddam, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Hussein bin Talal, King of Jordan, ref1

brahim, Hafez, ref1
celand, ref1, ref2
hsanoğlu, Ekmeleddin, ref1
mmigration laws, ref1
ndia:
nd Burma, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3
conomic growth in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd energy security, ref1, ref2
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
nd Iran, ref1
middle class in, ref1
nd Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
trategic autonomy of, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1
ndonesia:
nd climate change, ref1, ref2
emocracy in, ref1, ref2
ast Asia Summit in, ref1
conomic growth in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
unami in (2004), ref1, ref2
U.S.–ASEAN meeting in, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1
nnocence of Muslims (video), ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nsulza, José Miguel, ref1
nter-American Development Bank, ref1
nternational Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nternational Criminal Court (ICC), ref1,
ref2
nternational Monetary Fund (IMF), ref1,
ref2, ref3
nternational Red Cross, ref1, ref2
nternet, ref1
ensorship of, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd First Amendment, ref1
nfluence of, ref1, ref2, ref3
multistakeholder approach to, ref1
etworking via, ref1
errorists’ use of, ref1, ref2
Texts from Hillary” on, ref1
witter, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
s value-neutral, ref1
Invictus” (Henley), ref1
an, ref1
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3
n Axis of Evil, ref1
nd Egypt, ref1
lections in, ref1, ref2
Green Movement in, ref1
Hezbollah in, ref1, ref2
ikers imprisoned by, ref1
ostage rescue attempt in (1980), ref1,
ref2, ref3
ostages taken in (1979), ref1, ref2, ref3
nd internet, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Israel, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
uclear program of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11,
ref12, ref13, ref14, ref15, ref16, ref17
nd oil, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd provocation, ref1, ref2
Quds Force, ref1
Revolutionary Guard, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
Revolution in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
anctions against, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
hah of, ref1, ref2
mart power applied in, ref1
nd Sultan of Oman, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
ehran Research Reactor, ref1, ref2
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
heocracy in, ref1, ref2
nd Turkey, ref1, ref2
aq:
n Axis of Evil, ref1
Bush Administration focus on, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Clear, hold, and build” policy in, ref1
COIN in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s vote on, ref1, ref2
nd Israel, ref1
essons learned in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
o-fly zone in, ref1, ref2
il and gas in, ref1, ref2
pecial Operations in, ref1
Sunni Awakening” in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd terrorism, ref1
aining local soldiers in, ref1
U.S. diplomat killed in, ref1
U.S. invasion of, ref1, ref2, ref3
war in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
aq Resolution (2002), ref1
aq Study Group, ref1
eland:
Good Friday Agreement, ref1, ref2, ref3
Northern, ref1
ish Republican Army, ref1
slam:
id al Fitr, ref1, ref2
nd extremists, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd restrictions on women, ref1, ref2, ref3
plit within, ref1
srael:
Arab-Israeli War (1948), ref1
nd Arab Peace Initiative (2002), ref1,
ref2
irth rate in, ref1
nd Camp David Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd cease-fire, ref1
stablishment of (1948), ref1
nd Gaza, see Gaza Strip
nd Golan Heights, ref1
nd Goldstone Report, ref1
Hezbollah attacks on, ref1, ref2, ref3
Hillary Clinton’s travels to, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5
nd intifada, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
on Dome defense system in, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Jerusalem, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
s Jewish homeland, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Jordan Valley, ref1
MDA in, ref1
military edge of, ref1, ref2
atural gas reserves in, ref1
nd Oslo Peace Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd Palestine, ref1
ublic image of, ref1
nd self-defense, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd settlement construction, ref1, ref2
ix Day War, ref1, ref2
nd Sudan, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Turkey, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd two-state solution, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
nd West Bank settlements, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Yom Kippur War, ref1
aly:
nd Libya, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1
U.S. soldiers buried in, ref1

abari, Ahmed, ref1
ackson, Lisa, ref1
acobs, Janice, ref1
acobson, Roberta, ref1
ahjaga, Atifete, ref1
alil, Mustafa Abdul, ref1
alili, Saeed, ref1, ref2, ref3
apan:
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2
nd climate change, ref1
Clintons’ first visit to, ref1
emocracy in, ref1, ref2
conomy of, ref1, ref2
ukushima nuclear plant in, ref1, ref2, ref3
Hillary Clinton’s town hall meetings in,
ref1
nd Iran, ref1
Maritime Self-Defense Force, ref1
nd South China Sea, ref1, ref2
U.S. alliance with, ref1, ref2, ref3
womenomics” in, ref1
arrett, Valerie, ref1
assim al-Thani, Hamad bin (HBJ), ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
efferson, Thomas, ref1
enkins, Bonnie, ref1
iang Zemin, ref1, ref2
ibril, Mahmoud, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
iloty, Lauren, ref1
o, Yerka, ref1
obs, ref1
nd developing economies, ref1, ref2
nd energy production, ref1
nd foreign investment, ref1
nd international trade, ref1, ref2
nd working conditions, ref1
ohnson, Brock, ref1
ohnson, Lady Bird, ref1
ohnson Cook, Suzan, ref1
ohnson Sirleaf, Ellen, ref1
oint Special Operations Command, ref1
onathan, Goodluck, ref1
ones, Beth, ref1
ones, Don, ref1
ones, James, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
ones, Kerri-Ann, ref1
ones, Paul, ref1
ones, Stephanie Tubbs, ref1
ones, Terry, ref1, ref2
ordan:
nd energy sources, ref1
nd Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Libya, ref1
eforms in, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
udeh, Nasser, ref1
uppé, Alain, ref1, ref2
Kabila, Joseph, ref1
Kansi, Mir Aimal, ref1
Kantor, Mickey, ref1
Karp, Jonathan, ref1
Karzai, Hamid, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
nd elections, ref1
nd Taliban, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd transition, ref1
Kato, David, ref1, ref2
Kayani, Ashfaq Parvez, ref1
Kazakhstan, ref1, ref2
Keen, Ken, ref1
Kelly, Declan, ref1
Kelly, Ian, ref1
Kennedy, Jacqueline Bouvier, ref1
Kennedy, Jim, ref1, ref2
Kennedy, John F., ref1, ref2, ref3
Kennedy, Laura, ref1
Kennedy, Pat, ref1, ref2, ref3
Kennedy, Paul, ref1, ref2
Kennedy, Ted, ref1
Kenya:
lections in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
GBT in, ref1
echnology in, ref1
U.S. embassy bombed in, ref1, ref2, ref3
Kenya Agricultural Research Institute, ref1
Kenyatta, Uhuru, ref1
Kerry, John, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Afghanistan, ref1
nd Iran, ref1
nd New START, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
Ketchem, Fred, ref1, ref2
Key, John, ref1
Khalifa, Sheikh Khalid bin Ahmed al, ref1
Khalifa al-Thani, Sheikh Hamad bin, ref1
Khama, Seretse, ref1
Khamenei, Ayatollah Ali Hojatolislam,
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Khar, Hina Rabbani, ref1
Khatami, Mohammad, ref1
Kheradi, Irene, ref1
Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruholla, ref1, ref2
Khrushchev, Nikita, ref1
Khyber Pass, ref1
Kibaki, Mwai, ref1
Kiir, Salva, ref1, ref2
Kikwete, Jakaya, ref1
Kim Il-sung, ref1
Kim Jong Il, ref1
Kim Jong Un, ref1
King, Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., ref1
King, Robert, ref1
Kipling, Rudyard, ref1
Kirk, Ron, ref1
Kissinger, Henry A., ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
Klein, Jen, ref1, ref2
Koh, Harold, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
Kohl, Helmut, ref1
Kommareddi, Madhuri, ref1
Kony, Joseph, ref1
Korean War, ref1
Kosovo, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Kouchner, Bernard, ref1
Krishna, S. M., ref1
Kurtz-Phelan, Dan, ref1
Kuwait, ref1
Kyoto Accord, ref1, ref2, ref3
Kyrgyzstan, ref1, ref2

abor rights, ref1, ref2
aHood, Ray, ref1
amothe, Laurent, ref1
andler, Mark, ref1
angdon, Ross, ref1
antos, Tom, ref1, ref2
aos, ref1
arkins, Neal, ref1
atin America, ref1
ombined economy of, ref1
emocracies in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
conomic growth in, ref1
nergy and Climate Partnership of the
Americas, ref1
nd OAS, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Pathways to Prosperity” in, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2
wealth gap in, ref1
women as leaders in, ref1, ref2, ref3
ee also specific nations
aszczych, Joanne, ref1
avrov, Sergey, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Asia-Pacific, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2
nd Libya, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
eadership, definition of, ref1
ebanon:
Cedar Revolution in, ref1
risis in, ref1, ref2
Hezbollah in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd UN, ref1, ref2
U.S. facilities attacked in (1983), ref1,
ref2, ref3
ee, Euna, ref1, ref2
ee, Matt, ref1
ee Myung-bak, ref1, ref2
eghari, Begum Nasreen, ref1
eghari, Farooq Ahmad Khan, ref1
etterman, David, ref1
evinson, Robert, ref1
évy, Bernard-Henri, ref1, ref2
ew, Jack, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ewis, Reta Jo, ref1
GBT rights, ref1
iberia:
ivil war in, ref1
women activists in, ref1
ibya, ref1
all necessary measures” against, ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Arab League, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
ttacks in Benghazi, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ivil war in, ref1, ref2, ref3
lections in, ref1, ref2, ref3
fog of war” in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
nvestigations into Benghazi attacks in,
ref1, ref2
ournalists in, ref1
aw and order needed in, ref1, ref2
military campaign in, ref1
NATO forces in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
o-drive zone in, ref1, ref2
o-fly zone in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11
Qaddafi in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8
nd terrorism, ref1
ansitional government in, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
UN embargo on, ref1, ref2
U.S. staff evacuated from, ref1, ref2
intan brigade in, ref1
ieberman, Avigdor, ref1
incoln, Abraham, ref1, ref2, ref3
ing, Laura, ref1, ref2
i Shuxian, ref1
ithuania, ref1, ref2
ittlefield, Elizabeth, ref1
iu Xiaobo, ref1, ref2
ivni, Tzipi, ref1
obo, Porfirio, ref1
ocke, Gary, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
omellin, Carmen, ref1
ord’s Resistance Army (LRA), ref1, ref2
ouis XV, King of France, ref1
ove, Reggie, ref1, ref2
ucas, Laura, ref1
ugar, Richard, ref1
ula da Silva, Luiz Inácio, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6
uzzatto, Tamera, ref1
yman, Princeton, ref1
ynch, Christopher, ref1

Maas, Inge, ref1
Maathai, Wangari, ref1
Machel, Graça, ref1, ref2
Machel, Samora, ref1
Macmanus, Joe, ref1
Madagascar, ref1
Magariaf, Mohammed, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Magaziner, Ira, ref1
Malawi, agriculture in, ref1
Malaysia:
emocracy in, ref1
nd South China Sea, ref1
trategic importance of, ref1
waste management in, ref1
Mali, ref1
Maliki, Nouri al-, ref1
Malta, law center in, ref1
Mandela, Nelson, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
ging and death of, ref1
egacy of, ref1, ref2
Nobel Peace Prize to, ref1
Manning, Bradley, ref1
Manning, Greg, ref1
Manning, Lauren, ref1, ref2
Mansour, Mullah Akhtar Muhammad, ref1
Mao Zedong, ref1, ref2
Mardenfeld, Debbie, ref1, ref2
Marine One (helicopter), ref1
Markey, Ed, ref1
Marshall, Capricia, ref1, ref2, ref3
Marshall, George C., ref1, ref2
Marshall Plan, ref1
Martelly, Michel, ref1, ref2
Merten, Ken, ref1
Marton, Kati, ref1, ref2
Marzouki, Moncef, ref1
Massey, Stephen, ref1
Mbeki, Thabo, ref1
McAuliffe, Marisa, ref1
McCain, John, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
McCall, Dawn, ref1
McCartan, Joyce, ref1
McChrystal, Stanley, ref1, ref2
McConnell, Mitch, ref1, ref2, ref3
McCullough, Terri, ref1
McDonough, Denis, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
McFaul, Mike, ref1, ref2, ref3
McGovern, George, ref1
McGuinness, Martin, ref1, ref2
McHale, Judith, ref1, ref2
McHugh, John, ref1
McLean, Lori, ref1
McRaven, Bill, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Mead, Margaret, ref1
Mead, Walter Russell, ref1, ref2
Medvedev, Dmitry, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
Meehan, Bernadette, ref1
Mehta, Hansa, ref1
Merkel, Angela, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Merrill, Nick, ref1
Merten, Ken, ref1
Mexico:
nd climate change, ref1
rug cartels in, ref1, ref2
conomic growth in, ref1
nvironmental programs in, ref1
nancial crisis in, ref1
ndependence of, ref1
Mérida Initiative in, ref1, ref2
nd Pacific Alliance, ref1
ade with, ref1, ref2
U.S. consulates attacked in, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1
Mezvinsky, Marc, ref1, ref2
mGive, ref1
Micheletti, Roberto, ref1
Michiko, Empress (Japan), ref1, ref2
middle class, ref1
Middle East, ref1
Arab-Israeli War (1948), ref1
Arab Spring, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
nd Camp David Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3
conomic decline in, ref1
conomic reforms in, ref1
nergy sources in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travels to, ref1, ref2, ref3
slamic split in, ref1
nd Oslo Peace Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
eace efforts in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd the Quartet, ref1
nd Saban Forum, ref1
ix Day War, ref1, ref2
nd transitions to democracy, ref1
iolent reactions to offensive video in,
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Yom Kippur War, ref1
ee also specific nations
midterm elections:
1994), ref1
2006), ref1
2010), ref1
Mikulski, Barbara, ref1
Miliband, David, ref1, ref2
Millennium Challenge Corporation, ref1,
ref2
Miller, Patti, ref1
Mills, Cheryl, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Milošević, Slobodan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Mindszenty, Cardinal József, ref1, ref2
Missionaries of Charity, ref1
Mitchell, Derek, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Mitchell, George, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
nd Northern Ireland, ref1, ref2, ref3
Mobutu Sese Seko, ref1
Mogadishu, Somalia, ref1, ref2
Mohamud, Hassan Sheikh, ref1
Momeni, Esha, ref1
Mongolia, U.S. relationship with, ref1
Moran, Thomas, ref1
Morningstar, Richard, ref1, ref2
Morocco:
eforms in, ref1
treet protests in, ref1
Morsi, Mohamed, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Mother Teresa, ref1
Motsoaledi, Aaron, ref1
Mottaki, Manouchehr, ref1
Moussa, Amr, ref1, ref2
Mubarak, Gamal, ref1, ref2
Mubarak, Hosni, ref1, ref2
all from power, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
nd Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
nd violent protests, ref1
Mubarak, Suzanne, ref1, ref2
Mugabe, Robert, ref1
Mull, Steve, ref1, ref2
Mullen, Mike, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Munich Security Conference, ref1, ref2
Munter, Cameron, ref1
Murkowski, Lisa, ref1
Muscatine, Lissa, ref1, ref2, ref3
Museveni, Yoweri, ref1, ref2, ref3
Musharraf, Pervez, ref1, ref2
Muslim Brotherhood:
nd anti-U.S. protests, ref1
nd Arab Spring, ref1
nd Gaza, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Jordan, ref1
nd Qatar, ref1
se to power, ref1
nd transition, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Mutombo, Dikembe, ref1
Myanmar, see Burma

Nagorno-Karabakh, ref1
Nalbandian, Edward, ref1
Napolitano, Janet, ref1, ref2
Nasr, Vali, ref1
Nasser, Shada, ref1
National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security, ref1
National Building Museum, Washington,
ref1
National Democratic Institute, ref1
National Institutes of Health, ref1
National Intelligence Council, ref1
National Science Foundation, ref1
National Security Agency (NSA), ref1,
ref2
National Security Council, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5
NATO, ref1, ref2
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
xpansion of, ref1
n Kosovo, ref1, ref2
n Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd September 11 attacks, ref1
nd Washington Treaty, ref1
Nelson, Chaniqua, ref1
Netanyahu, Benjamin “Bibi,” ref1
nd elections, ref1
nd Gaza, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Jerusalem, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd peace process, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
nd settlement construction, ref1, ref2
nd two-state solution, ref1
Netanyahu, Benzion, ref1
Netanyahu, Yonatan, ref1
Newseum, ref1
New START (New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty), ref1, ref2
New York University, ref1, ref2, ref3
New Zealand, ref1
Nides, Tom, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Nigeria:
il from, ref1, ref2
nd resource curse, ref1
nd UN, ref1
waste management in, ref1
Nigerian bank scam, ref1
Nixon, Richard M., and China, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Nixon Administration, ref1
Nkoana-Mashabane, Maite, ref1
No Ceilings: The Full Partnership Project,
ref1
Norman, Adrian, ref1
Northern Distribution Network, ref1
Northern Ireland, ref1, ref2
Good Friday Agreement, ref1, ref2, ref3
Hillsborough Agreement, ref1
Vital Voices Conference in, ref1, ref2
North Korea, ref1, ref2
n Axis of Evil, ref1
nd Burma, ref1, ref2, ref3
Cheonan incident, ref1
nd DMZ, ref1
uclear capability of, ref1
epression in, ref1
anctions against, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Norway, melting glaciers in, ref1
Nossel, Suzanne, ref1
Nuland, Toria, ref1, ref2
Nye, Joseph, ref1
Obama, Barack, ref1
nd Afghanistan/Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
nd Africa, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Asia-Pacific, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd bin Laden operation, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3
s Commander in Chief, ref1
nd counterterrorism, ref1
nd Europe, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd financial recession, ref1
nd foreign investment, ref1
nd foreign trade, ref1
nd Haiti, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Holbrooke, ref1
Hillary Clinton working with, ref1, ref2
nd Latin America, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd Mandela, ref1
nd Middle East, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11,
ref12, ref13, ref14, ref15, ref16, ref17,
ref18
ath of office, ref1
nd “the Obama effect,” ref1
nd Pakistan, ref1
s President-elect, ref1
nd presidential race (2008), ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5
nd primaries (2008), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
eelection of, ref1
nd Russia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7
nd Secretary of State offer to Hillary
Clinton, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
enate campaign of, ref1
West Point speech by, ref1, ref2, ref3
Obama, Michelle, ref1, ref2, ref3
Obama, Sasha and Malia, ref1
Obama Administration:
Cabinet and team members, ref1
nd China, ref1, ref2
nd drone strikes, ref1, ref2
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11
nd Israel/Palestine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
residential Policy Directives, ref1
nd reelection, ref1
Oberly, Kay, ref1
O’Connor, Michael, ref1
Odinga, Raila Amolo, ref1
O’Leary, Ann, ref1
Oliver, Mary, ref1
Olmert, Ehud, ref1, ref2, ref3
Olsson, Kurt, ref1, ref2, ref3
Oman:
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Omar, Mullah, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
O’Meara, Joy, ref1
O’Neill, Peter, ref1
One World Clean Energy, ref1
Open Skies Agreements, ref1
Operation Cast Lead, ref1
Operation Eagle Claw, ref1, ref2
Operation Neptune Spear, ref1
Operation Pillar of Defense, ref1
Operation Tomodachi, ref1
Operation Unified Protector, ref1
Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development, ref1
Organization for Security and Cooperation,
ref1
Organization of American States (OAS),
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, ref1,
ref2
Ortega, Daniel, ref1
Orwell, George, ref1, ref2
Oslo Peace Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Otero, Maria, ref1
Ottoman Empire, ref1
Overseas Private Investment Corporation
(OPIC), ref1

acific Alliance, ref1
acific Island Forum, ref1
ahlavi, Mohammad Reza Shah, ref1, ref2
akistan:
Afghanistan border with, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
l Qaeda in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
in Laden in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ounterterrorism in, ref1
rone attacks in, ref1, ref2
conomic hardship in, ref1, ref2
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
nd India, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7
SI, ref1, ref2
oldiers killed by U.S. forces in (2011),
ref1
overeignty of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
aliban in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
errorism in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
ade with Afghanistan, ref1
USAID in, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
alestinian Territories:
irth rate in, ref1
nd Camp David Accords, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd cease-fire, ref1
nd East Jerusalem, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd elections, ref1
nd Fatah, ref1, ref2
ag of, ref1, ref2
nd Gaza, see Gaza Strip
nd Hamas, see Hamas
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
nd Israel, ref1
nd Palestinian Authority, ref1
nd statehood, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd two-state solution, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
nd West Bank, ref1, ref2, ref3
alestinian Authority (PA), ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5
alestinian Islamic Jihad, ref1, ref2
alestinian Liberation Organization, ref1
alin, Sarah, ref1, ref2
ally, Maura, ref1
anama, trade agreement with, ref1, ref2
an Am Flight 103, Lockerbie, ref1
andith, Farah, ref1
anetta, Leon:
nd Afghanistan/Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Benghazi, ref1, ref2
nd bin Laden operation, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd CIA, ref1
nd counterterrorism measures, ref1
s Defense Secretary, ref1, ref2
nd Middle East unrest, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd New Zealand ships, ref1
apua New Guinea, ref1
arks, Rosa, ref1, ref2
artners in Health, ref1
ascual, Carlos, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
astrana, Andrés, ref1
ataki, George E., ref1
atel, Nirav, ref1
atterson, Anne, ref1, ref2
aulson, Hank, ref1, ref2
eace Corps, ref1, ref2
elosi, Nancy, ref1
EPFAR (President’s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief), ref1, ref2, ref3
eres, Shimon, ref1
erl, Liz, ref1
ersian Gulf, ref1, ref2
nd Arab Spring protests, ref1
Gulf Cooperation Council, ref1, ref2, ref3
Gulf War (1991), ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Iran, ref1
nd Muslim Brotherhood, ref1
nd oil, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
U.S. military support in, ref1, ref2, ref3
ee also specific nations
eru:
mass transit in, ref1
nd Pacific Alliance, ref1
esaru, Shilpa, ref1
etraeus, David, ref1
nd Afghanistan/Pakistan, ref1, ref2
nd CIA, ref1, ref2
nd COIN, ref1, ref2
nd Iraq, ref1, ref2
nd Syria, ref1
hilip Morris, ref1
hilippines:
lections in, ref1
nd South China Sea, ref1, ref2, ref3
U.S. alliance with, ref1, ref2, ref3
ickering, Thomas, ref1
inochet, Augusto, ref1
itsuwan, Surin, ref1
odesta, John, ref1, ref2
oehler, Amy, ref1
oland:
hale gas extraction in, ref1
olidarity in, ref1
orat, Yochai, ref1
osner, Michael, ref1, ref2, ref3
owell, Colin, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
owell, Nancy, ref1
ower, Samantha, ref1
rague Spring, ref1
ray the Devil Back to Hell
(documentary), ref1
residential elections:
2008), ref1, ref2, ref3
2012), ref1
2016), ref1
réval, René, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
rikhodko, Sergei, ref1
rosser, Julia, ref1
utin, Vladimir, ref1, ref2
nd Central Asia, ref1, ref2
nd Crimea, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Eurasian Union, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s meetings with, ref1, ref2
nd KGB, ref1
nd LGBT, ref1
eturn to power, ref1, ref2
nd Russian expansionism, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd Syria, ref1, ref2
nd term limits, ref1
nd Ukraine, ref1, ref2

Qaboos, Sultan of Iran, ref1
Qaddafi, Muammar, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
apture and death of, ref1
all from power, ref1, ref2, ref3
Qaddafi, Saif al-Islam, ref1
Qatar, ref1
nd Al Jazeera, ref1
orum for the Future conference in, ref1,
ref2
nd Gaza, ref1, ref2
eography of, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
nfluence of, ref1
nd Libya, ref1, ref2
nd Syria, ref1, ref2
aliban in, ref1, ref2, ref3
U.S. relationship with, ref1
Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development
Review, ref1
Quam, Lois, ref1
Quartet, ref1
Qureshi, Shah Mahmood, ref1, ref2

Rabbani, Burhanuddin, ref1
Rabin, Leah, ref1
Rabin, Yitzhak, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Rafsanjani, Ali Akbar Hashemi, ref1
Ramesh, Jairam, ref1
Randolph, Lawrence, ref1
Rapp, Stephen, ref1
Rasmussen, Anders Fogh, ref1, ref2, ref3
Reagan, Nancy, ref1
Reagan, Ronald, ref1, ref2, ref3
Redelfs, Arthur, ref1
Reid, Harry, ref1, ref2, ref3
Reidy, Carolyn, ref1
Reines, Philippe, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Reinfeldt, Fredrik, ref1
eligious freedom, ref1
Reynoso, Julissa, ref1
Rezaei, Mohsen, ref1
Rhodes, Ben, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Rhorer, Richard, ref1
Rice, Condoleezza, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
Rice, Susan, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd North Korea, ref1
s UN Ambassador, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Richard, Anne, ref1
Ride, Sally, ref1
Riedel, Bruce, ref1
Riedel review, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Robinson, John, ref1
Robinson, Peter, ref1
Rodham, Dorothy, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Rodham, Hugh (brother), ref1, ref2
Rodham, Hugh (father), ref1, ref2
Rodham, Tony (brother), ref1
Rodriguez, Miguel, ref1
Romney, Mitt, ref1, ref2
Rooney, Megan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Roosevelt, Eleanor, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
Roosevelt, Franklin D., ref1, ref2, ref3
Roosevelt, Theodore, ref1
Rosenthal, Hannah, ref1
Ross, Alec, ref1, ref2, ref3
Ross, Dennis, ref1, ref2, ref3
Rothberg, Adam, ref1
Rouhani, Hassan, ref1
Rousseff, Dilma, ref1, ref2
Roy, Stapleton, ref1
Rudd, Kevin, ref1, ref2
Ruggiero, Frank, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Rumsfeld, Donald, ref1
Russia, ref1
nti-gay laws in, ref1
nd Arctic Council, ref1, ref2
ttacks on the press in, ref1, ref2
Boeing Design Center, Moscow, ref1
nd Central Asia, ref1, ref2
nd China, ref1, ref2
nd Crimea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
emographic crisis in, ref1
conomy of, ref1
lections in, ref1
s energy source, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
xpansionism in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
nd Georgia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Hillary Clinton’s radio interview in, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Mongolia, ref1
nd Northern Distribution Network, ref1
nd North Korea, ref1
uclear treaty with, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd the Quartet, ref1
eset with, ref1, ref2
e-Sovietization of, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
nd technology, ref1
nd Turkey, ref1
nd Ukraine, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2, ref3
Russo, Robert, ref1
Russo, Seth, ref1
Rwanda, genocide in, ref1
aberi, Roxana, ref1
adat, Anwar, ref1, ref2
aid al Said, Sultan Qaboos bin, ref1
alazar, Ken, ref1
alcido Ceniceros, Jorge Alberto, ref1
aleh, Ali Abdullah, ref1, ref2
alisbury, Lord, ref1
all, Macky, ref1
amuelson, Heather, ref1
and, Maria, ref1
antos, Juan Manuel, ref1
antos, Marina, ref1
arkozy, Nicolas, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
aturday Night Live, ref1
audi Arabia:
nd Bahrain, ref1
hild marriage in, ref1
s Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
ref1
nd energy resources, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
an assassination plot against, ref1
Khobar Towers bombing (1996), ref1, ref2
nd Qatar, ref1
nd September 11 attacks, ref1
ocial welfare programs in, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3
U.S. consulate attacked in, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2
women restricted in, ref1, ref2
avage, Dan, ref1
chell, Orville, ref1
chumer, Chuck, ref1, ref2
chwartz, Eric, ref1
chwarzkopf, Norman, ref1
chwerin, Dan, ref1, ref2
CIF (Sensitive Compartmented
Information Facility), ref1
cott (DS agent in Benghazi), ref1
EALs:
nd bin Laden, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ntelligence work of, ref1
ecretary of State:
ir travel of, ref1; see also specific
nations
voiding domestic politics, ref1
onfirmation hearing, ref1, ref2
conomic statecraft of, ref1
nd employee security, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
nd foreign policy architecture, ref1
ormer Secretaries, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s last day as, ref1
ob offer of, ref1, ref2
ffice suite of, ref1
assing the baton of, ref1
nd public opinion, ref1
oles of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
s senior Cabinet post, ref1, ref2
nd smart power, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
ansition team for, ref1
working with the President, ref1
ee also State Department, U.S.
eeds of Peace, ref1
electUSA, ref1
elleck, Michael, ref1
enegal:
onstitutional crisis in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s speech in, ref1
enussi, Abdullah al-, ref1
eow, Jackie, ref1
eptember 11 attacks:
nd al Qaeda, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
nniversaries of, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd bin Laden, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Bush Administration, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd emergency relief, ref1, ref2
nd European support, ref1
nd failed states, ref1
nd Ground Zero, ref1, ref2
nd Iran, ref1
/11 Commission, ref1
nd Saudi Arabia, ref1
nd Victims Compensation Fund, ref1
nd War on Terror, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
erbia, ref1
eward, William Henry, ref1
hafik, Ahmed, ref1
hah, Rajiv, ref1, ref2, ref3
haheen, Jeanne, ref1
hailor, Barbara, ref1
halit, Gilad, ref1
hannon, Tom, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
hapiro, Andrew, ref1, ref2
hapiro, Dan, ref1
haron, Ariel, ref1
heikh Ahmed, Sharif, ref1, ref2
herman, Wendy, ref1, ref2
hields, Colin, ref1
hillady, Rev. William, ref1, ref2
hinseki, Eric, ref1
hourd, Sarah, ref1, ref2
hultz, George, ref1, ref2
hwe Mann, ref1, ref2
ikorski, Rados_aw, ref1, ref2
inai Peninsula, ref1, ref2
ingapore, and South China Sea, ref1
ingh, Manmohan, ref1, ref2, ref3
inn Féin, ref1
isi, Abdul-Fattah el-, ref1
ix Day War, ref1, ref2
laughter, Anne-Marie, ref1, ref2
mith, Chris, ref1
mith, Dan, ref1
mith, Fred, ref1
mith, Jeannemarie, ref1
mith, Sean, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
mith, Stephen, ref1
nowden, Edward, ref1, ref2
olidarity Center, ref1
omalia, ref1
Al Shabaab in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
Black Hawk Down” incident in, ref1
s classic failed state, ref1
lections in, ref1, ref2
Mogadishu in, ref1, ref2
irates based in, ref1, ref2
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ansitional government in, ref1
omaly Mam, ref1
omare, Sir Michael, ref1
onenshine, Tara, ref1
outh Africa:
partheid in, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2
conomic growth in, ref1
HIV/AIDS in, ref1, ref2
nd Mandela, ref1, ref2
Robben Island in, ref1
outh China Sea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
outhern Corridor pipeline, ref1
outh Korea:
Cheonan incident, ref1
nd climate change, ref1
emocracy in, ref1
nd DMZ, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
nd Iran, ref1
ade agreement with, ref1
U.S. alliance with, ref1, ref2
outh Sudan, ref1
ndependence of, ref1
il in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
oviet Union:
ollapse of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
withdrawal from Afghanistan (1989), ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
ee also Russia
tark, Tyler, ref1
tate Department, U.S.:
cademic exchanges supported by, ref1,
ref2, ref3
Accountability Review Board, ref1
viation diplomacy, ref1
Bureau of Energy Resources, ref1
Cabinet post, ref1, ref2; see also Secretary
of State
areer professionals in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd chain of command, ref1, ref2
ounterterrorism in, ref1
nd democratic values vs. security
interests, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
iplomats who died overseas, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
nergy diplomacy, ref1
nd federal budget, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
orward-deployed diplomacy in, ref1
nd frozen conflicts, ref1
Heroism Award, ref1
nd human rights, see human rights
nd international development, ref1, ref2
nvestigations into Benghazi attacks, ref1,
ref2
nd jobs, ref1
nd LGBT rights, ref1
nd religious prosecution, ref1
nd SelectUSA, ref1
nd transitions from dictatorship to
democracy, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6
nd 21st-century statecraft, ref1
wicked problems in, ref1, ref2
nd WikiLeaks, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
teen, Florence, ref1
teinberg, Don, ref1
teinberg, Jim, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
teiner, Michael, ref1
tern, Todd, ref1, ref2, ref3
tevens, Anne, ref1, ref2
tevens, Chris:
n Benghazi attacks, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd CIA briefing, ref1
eath of, ref1, ref2
memories of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
s Special Representative/Ambassador,
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
tevenson, Adlai E., ref1
tewart, Karen, ref1
tilwell, “Vinegar Joe,” ref1
t. John, Gregory, ref1
tock, Ann, ref1
tone, Elizabeth, ref1
tøre, Jonas Gahr, ref1, ref2, ref3
trait of Hormuz, ref1, ref2
udan:
ivil war in, ref1
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, ref1
nd Darfur genocide, ref1, ref2
nd South Sudan, ref1, ref2, ref3
errorism in, ref1
U.S. Embassy in, ref1
uez Canal, ref1, ref2
uharto, Indonesian President, ref1
uleiman, Michel, ref1
uleiman, Omar, ref1, ref2, ref3
ullivan, Jake, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Burma, ref1
nd Chen, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
nd Gaza, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
ummit of the Americas:
1994), ref1, ref2
2009), ref1
2010), ref1, ref2
Sunni Awakening,” ref1, ref2, ref3
un Tzu, The Art of War, ref1
uperstorm Sandy, ref1
upreme Court, U.S., ref1
uu Kyi, Aung San, ref1, ref2
Congressional Gold Medal to, ref1
nd government reforms, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Hillary Clinton’s visits, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd the Irrawaddy, ref1, ref2
nd Parliament, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
residential Medal of Freedom to, ref1
nd President Obama, ref1, ref2
elease from house arrest, ref1, ref2
avel to U.S., ref1
nd Yettaw, ref1
weden, and climate change, ref1, ref2
witzerland:
iplomacy conducted via, ref1
nd Turkey, ref1
yed, Zia, ref1
yria, ref1, ref2, ref3
Alawites in, ref1, ref2
ease-fire in, ref1
hemical weapons used in, ref1
ivil war in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7
isorganized opposition in, ref1
xtremists in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
s failed state, ref1
ree Syrian Army, ref1
Hama massacre (1982), ref1, ref2
Hezbollah in, ref1, ref2, ref3
umanitarian aid to people of, ref1, ref2,
ref3
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Israel, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
roxy warfare in, ref1
efugees from, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Russia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
anctions against, ref1, ref2
ix-point plan for, ref1, ref2
treet protests in, ref1, ref2
nd terrorism, ref1, ref2, ref3
aining rebels in, ref1
ansition in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
weapons supplied to, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
s wicked problem, ref1, ref2, ref3

aban, Anngrace, ref1
aban, Bishop Elias, ref1
aiwan, democracy in, ref1
aliban:
n Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
nd al Qaeda, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd A-Rod contact, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd bin Laden’s death, ref1
egotiation with, ref1, ref2, ref3
n Pakistan, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
ropaganda of, ref1
n Qatar, ref1, ref2, ref3
ortures by, ref1
alwar, Puneet, ref1, ref2, ref3
antalus, ref1
antawi, Mohamed, ref1
anzania:
griculture in, ref1
U.S. embassy bombed in, ref1, ref2, ref3
auscher, Ellen, ref1, ref2, ref3
aylor, Charles, ref1, ref2
aylor, Jewel, ref1
echnology, ref1
yber attacks, ref1
nd government surveillance, ref1
nd Israeli defense, ref1
male vs. female users of, ref1
mobile phones, ref1, ref2
nd Newseum, ref1
nd privacy, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Snowden, ref1
echCamp, ref1
WikiLeaks, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ee also internet
haçi, Hashim, ref1
hailand, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
han Shwe, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
hatcher, Margaret, ref1, ref2
hein Sein:
nd elections, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s meetings with, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
nd Myitsone Dam, ref1
s President of Burma, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd reforms, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Suu Kyi, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
homas-Greenfield, Linda, ref1
ibet, ref1
illeman, Tomicah, ref1
imor-Leste, ref1
itanic, ref1
ocqueville, Alexis de, ref1
oiv, Nora, ref1
rade and Development Agency, ref1
rans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), ref1, ref2
reasury Department, U.S., and terrorist
financing, ref1
ruman, Harry S, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
ruman Administration, ref1
sang, Donald, ref1
ubman, Harriet, ref1
unisia:
lections in, ref1
eaceful transition in, ref1, ref2
treet protests in, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
U.S. Embassy besieged in, ref1, ref2
urkey, ref1
nd Armenia, ref1
nd climate change, ref1
conomic growth in, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd France, ref1
nd Greece, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Israel, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Southern Corridor pipeline, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd the UN, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1, ref2
nd Zero Problems, ref1, ref2, ref3
1st-century statecraft, ref1
se of term, ref1
ee also technology
witter:
n Iran, ref1, ref2
n Russia, ref1
nd State Department, ref1
n Syria, ref1

U2, ref1
Uganda:
linic in, ref1
GBT in, ref1
military training in, ref1
nd the UN, ref1
Ukraine:
nd European Union, ref1, ref2
Orange Revolution in, ref1
nd Russia, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
United Arab Emirates (UAE), ref1, ref2,
ref3
ntervention in Bahrain, ref1, ref2
nd Libya, ref1, ref2
nd Qatar, ref1
nd Syria, ref1
United Kingdom:
conomic recession in, ref1
Good Friday Agreement, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd Iran, ref1
nd Kenya, ref1
nd Libya, ref1, ref2
nd Syria, ref1, ref2
U.S. relationship with, ref1
United Nations (UN):
nd Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3
Chapter VII resolution in, ref1
nd chemical weapons, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2
nd Crimea, ref1
nd Cuba, ref1
nd emerging powers, ref1
nd Global Counterterrorism Forum, ref1,
ref2
nd Goldstone Report, ref1
nd Haiti, ref1, ref2
nd human rights, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
nternational Women’s Day, ref1
nd Iran, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd Libya, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd Middle East, ref1, ref2
nd North Korea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, ref1
5+1 nations, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
nd Palestine, ref1
eacekeeping missions of, ref1, ref2
nd the Quartet, ref1
otating seats in, ref1
ecurity Council resolutions, ref1
nd Syria, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
UN Women, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
U.S. Ambassador to, ref1, ref2, ref3
United States:
nd Arctic Council, ref1
nd climate change, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nd debt default, ref1
rones used by, ref1, ref2
rug markets in, ref1
mbassies bombed in East Africa (1998),
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
nergy production in, ref1, ref2
nancial crisis in (2008), ref1
nd foreign policy, see State Department,
U.S.
ull faith and credit of, ref1
nd humanitarian aid, ref1, ref2
nd human trafficking, ref1, ref2
mmigrants in, ref1
nteragency competition in, ref1
nd international trade, ref1, ref2
nd laws of war and self-defense, ref1
eadership roles of, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
GBT in, ref1
nd Obama, see Obama, Barack
nd the Quartet, ref1
efugees in embassies of, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
umors of decline, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
rade Enforcement Unit, ref1
se of torture in, ref1
olunteerism in, ref1
women and the economy in, ref1
ee also Secretary of State; State
Department
United States Africa Command, ref1
Universal Declaration on Human Rights,
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8, ref9
UPS, ref1
Urda, Gary, ref1
Uribe, Álvaro, ref1, ref2
U.S.–Afghan Women’s Council, ref1
USAID (U.S. Agency for International
Development), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
nd Afghanistan/Pakistan, ref1, ref2
reation of, ref1
Development Credit Authority, ref1
Grand Challenges” competitions, ref1
nd Haiti, ref1, ref2, ref3
nd women’s programs, ref1
U.S. Army:
0th Mountain Division, ref1
Night Stalkers, ref1
U.S. Coast Guard, ref1
U.S.–EU Energy Council, ref1, ref2
U.S. Global Development Lab, ref1
U.S. Navy:
th Fleet, ref1
nd North Korea, ref1
EALs, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
USNS Comfort, ref1
USS Cole, ref1
USS Fitzgerald, ref1
USS George Washington, ref1
USS Impeccable, ref1
Uzbekistan, ref1, ref2
Valenzuela, Arturo, ref1
Valmoro, Lona, ref1, ref2
Vaysbeyn, Elina, ref1
Velayati, Ali-Akbar, ref1
Venezuela:
nd Haiti, ref1
nd OAS, ref1, ref2
tate-controlled economy of, ref1, ref2
Verma, Rich, ref1, ref2
Verveer, Melanne, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
Verveer, Phil, ref1
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations (1961), ref1, ref2
Vietnam:
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
abor issues in, ref1
estrictions in, ref1
nd South China Sea, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
trategic importance of, ref1
U.S. relationship with, ref1
Vietnam War, ref1, ref2
Vilsack, Tom, ref1
Vital Voices, ref1, ref2, ref3
Vogelstein, Rachel, ref1, ref2
Voice of America, ref1, ref2, ref3

Wade, Abdoulaye, ref1
Walker, Diana, ref1
Walles, Jake, ref1
Walsh, Matthew, ref1
Wang, Bob, ref1, ref2, ref3
Wang Lijun, ref1
Wang Qishan, ref1
Warner, John, ref1
Warsaw Pact, ref1
Washington, George, ref1, ref2
Waxman, Henry, ref1
Webb, Jim, ref1, ref2
Wellington Declaration, ref1
Wells, Alice, ref1
Wen Jiabao:
nd Chen, ref1
nd climate change conference, ref1, ref2,
ref3
nd Iran, ref1
nd South China Sea, ref1, ref2
nd transition, ref1, ref2
nd U.S.-China relationship, ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
Wesley, John, ref1
Westerwelle, Guido, ref1, ref2
White, Pamela, ref1
White, Ryan, ref1
White, Stanford, ref1
Widmer, Ted, ref1
WikiLeaks, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wilberforce, William, ref1
wildlife trafficking, ref1, ref2
Williams, Maggie, ref1, ref2
Willson, Jeff, ref1
Winnefeld, James “Sandy” Jr., ref1, ref2
Wisner, Frank, ref1, ref2
Wohlers, Paul, ref1
women’s rights, ref1, ref2
n Afghanistan, ref1, ref2, ref3
n Africa, ref1
n China, ref1, ref2
ender-based violence in Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), ref1
nd Hillary Clinton’s Beijing speech, ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
slam’s restrictions on women, ref1, ref2,
ref3
n Japan, ref1
nd the UN, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Woods, Tyrone, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Woolheater, Ashley, ref1
workers’ rights, ref1, ref2
World Bank, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
World Conference on Women, Beijing
(1995), ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
World Economic Forum, Davos, ref1
World Health Organization, ref1
World Trade Center (1993) bombing, ref1
World Trade Organization, ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5
Wyllie, Andrew, ref1
Wyss, Laura, ref1
Xi Jinping, ref1

Yang Jiechi, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8
Yanukovych, Viktor, ref1, ref2
Yao Ming, ref1
Yavuz, Elif, ref1
Yeltsin, Boris, ref1, ref2
Yemen:
nd Arab Spring, ref1
ounterterrorism in, ref1
Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1, ref2
nrest in, ref1, ref2
Yettaw, John, ref1
Yohannes, Daniel, ref1
Yom Kippur War, ref1
Yousef, Ramzi, ref1
Yudhoyono, Susilo Bambang, ref1, ref2,
ref3

akaria, Fareed, ref1, ref2
ambia, Hillary Clinton’s travel to, ref1
ardari, Asif Ali, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6, ref7
arif, Javad, ref1
azi, Najibullah, ref1
elaya, Manuel, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
enawi, Meles, ref1
hang Yesui, ref1
hou Enlai, ref1, ref2
imbabwe, ref1
oellick, Robert, ref1
uma, Jacob, ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
PHOTO CREDITS
Front endpaper: © Annie
Leibovitz/Contact Press Images
Back endpaper: AP Photo/Evan Vucci

1. Win McNamee/Getty Images
2. © Barbara Kinney
3. © Barbara Kinney
4. © Christopher
Fitzgerald/CandidatePhotos/Newsco
5. AP Photo/Charles Dharapak
6. Alex Wong/Getty Images
7. MARK RALSTON/AFP/Getty
Images
8. Mannie Garcia/Bloomberg via
Getty Images
9. Official White House Photo by Pete
Souza
10. Department of State
11. REUTERS/Jason Reed
12. Matthew Cavanaugh-Pool/Getty
Images
13. Melissa Golden/Redux
14. © Philippe Reines
15. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
16. REUTERS/Toru Hanai
17. Bloomberg via Getty Images
18. TATAN SYUFLANA/AFP/Getty
Images
19. Ann Johansson/Getty Images
20. AP Photo/Korea Pool
21. Photo by Cherie Cullen/DOD via
Getty Images
22. SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images
23. AP Photo/Greg Baker/Pool
24. Win McNamee/Getty Images
25. SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images
26. AP Photo/Saul Loeb, Pool
27. © Genevieve de Manio
28. Getty Images News/Getty Images
29. Win McNamee/Getty Images
30. AP Photo/Saul Loeb, Pool
31. AP Photo/Saul Loeb, Pool
32. AP Photo/Saul Loeb, Pool
33. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
34. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
35. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
36. REUTERS/Jerry Lampen
37. SHAH MARAI/AFP/Getty Images
38. Department of State
39. J. SCOTT
APPLEWHITE/AFP/Getty Images
40. ROBERT F. BUKATY/AFP/Getty
Images
41. AP Photo/K. M. Chaudary
42. Diana Walker/TIME
43. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
44. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
45. TRIPPLAAR
KRISTOFFER/SIPA/Newscom
46. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images
47. Michael Nagle/Getty Images
48. REUTERS/Larry Downing
49. KCSPresse/Splash
News/Newscom
50. Brendan Smialowski/Getty Images
51. Department of State
52. BRENDAN
SMIALOWSKI/AFP/Getty Images
53. SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images
54. AP Photo/RIA-Novosti, Alexei
Nikolsky, Pool
55. HARAZ N.
GHANBARI/AFP/Getty Images
56. © Philippe Reines
57. AP Photo/Mandel Ngan, Pool
58. AP Photo/Eraldo Peres
59. © TMZ.com/Splash News/Corbis
60. STR/AFP/Getty Images
61. AP Photo/Pablo Martinez
Monsivais, Pool
62. REUTERS/Glenna Gordon/Pool
63. ROBERTO SCHMIDT/AFP/Getty
Images
64. AP Photo/Khalil Senosi
65. AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin, Pool
66. Photo by Susan Walsh, Pool/Getty
Images
67. AMOS GUMULIRA/AFP/Getty
Images
68. Charles Sleicher/Danita Delimont
Photography/Newscom
69. AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin, Pool
70. © Sara Latham
71. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
72. © Stephanie Sinclair/VII/Corbis
73. Astrid Riecken/Getty Images
74. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
75. Department of State
76. MARWAN
NAAMANI/AFP/Getty Images
77. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
78. PAUL J. RICHARDS/AFP/Getty
Images
79. REUTERS/Kevin Lamarque
80. Department of State
81. STR/AFP/Getty Images
82. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
83. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
84. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images
85. KEVIN LAMARQUE/AFP/Getty
Images
86. Mario Tama/Getty Images
87. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
88. AP Photo/Egyptian Presidency
89. Official White House Photo by
Pete Souza
90. AP Photo/Saul Loeb, Pool
91. © Kris Balderston
92. AP Photo/Julie Jacobson, Pool
93. Allison Shelley/Getty Images
94. AP Photo/Larry Downing, Pool
95. Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via
Getty Images
96. Courtesy of the William J. Clinton
Presidential Library
97. Washington Post/Getty Images
98. AP Photo/Anja Niedringhaus
99. © Nicholas Merrill
100. MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty
Images
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
1. Surrounded by friends and supporters
in the National Building Museum in
Washington, D.C., I end my Presidential
campaign on June 7, 2008, and endorse
Barack Obama after putting “18 million
cracks” in the “highest, hardest glass
ceiling.”
2. After a long night of writing and
rewriting, Bill and I make final changes
to my farewell speech before leaving
our home in Washington on June 7,
2008.
3. Despite the hard-fought campaign,
Barack and I talk easily on the bus on the
way to our first joint event in June 2008
in Unity, New Hampshire, a town chosen
not only for its name but also because
we received exactly the same number of
votes there in the primary. The rally in
Unity was designed to send an
unmistakable message that the primary
was behind us, and we were now one
team.
4. On December 1, 2008, in Chicago,
President-elect Obama announces me as
his choice to serve as the sixty-seventh
Secretary of State, along with the rest of
his national security team. Behind us
are: National Security Advisor–
designate retired Marine General James
Jones, Vice President-elect Joe Biden,
Defense Secretary Robert Gates,
Homeland Security Secretary–designate
Janet Napolitano, and Attorney General–
designate Eric Holder.
5. Vice President Biden administers my
ceremonial oath of office at the State
Department on February 2, 2009, while
Bill, Chelsea, and my mom, Dorothy,
help hold the Bible. I was officially
sworn in a few weeks earlier in my
Senate office immediately after the
confirmation vote so I could get right to
work.
6. Walking through the lobby of the State
Department for the first time as
Secretary on January 22, 2009, I was
overwhelmed and humbled by the
enthusiastic welcome.
7. Vice President Biden’s warmth and
humor would be very welcome during
our long hours in the White House
Situation Room. We also tried to meet
for breakfast every week at the Naval
Observatory, his official residence.
8. I was honored to serve in President
Obama’s Cabinet, pictured here with
President Obama and Vice President
Biden in the Grand Foyer of the White
House on July 26, 2012. Seated, from
left, are: Transportation Secretary Ray
LaHood, Acting Commerce Secretary
Rebecca Blank, U.S. Permanent
Representative to the United Nations
Susan Rice, and Agriculture Secretary
Tom Vilsack. Standing in the second
row, from left, are: Education Secretary
Arne Duncan, Attorney General Eric H.
Holder Jr., Labor Secretary Hilda L.
Solis, Treasury Secretary Timothy F.
Geithner, Chief of Staff Jack Lew (who
previously served as my Deputy
Secretary of State), me, Defense
Secretary Leon Panetta, Veterans Affairs
Secretary Eric K. Shinseki, Homeland
Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, and
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk.
Standing in the third row, from left, are:
Housing and Urban Development
Secretary Shaun Donovan, Energy
Secretary Steven Chu, Health and
Human Services Secretary Kathleen
Sebelius, Interior Secretary Ken Salazar,
Environmental Protection Agency
Administrator Lisa P. Jackson, Office of
Management and Budget Acting Director
Jeffrey D. Zients, Council of Economic
Advisers Chair Alan Krueger, and Small
Business Administration Administrator
Karen G. Mills.
9. With some of my extraordinary State
Department colleagues. My team was
made up of Foreign Service officers,
career civil servants, and advisors.
10. First Lady Michelle Obama and I
bonded over our shared experiences as
First Ladies—some of them humorous.
11. On my first full day on the job,
President Obama and Vice President
Biden visit the State Department to
announce Richard Holbrooke (left) as
Special Representative for Afghanistan
and Pakistan and Senator George
Mitchell (right) as Special Envoy for
Middle East Peace.
12. Grabbing a quick lunch at the State
Department cafeteria. I tried to eat
regular meals but it was often a
challenge, particularly on the road.
13. My senior advisors, from left to
right, Jake Sullivan, Philippe Reines,
and Huma Abedin in our home away
from home, a special blue and white
U.S. Air Force 757. Over four years we
spent a total of eighty-seven full days in
the air!
14. One fine day in April 2009 President
Obama suggested we finish a meeting at
the picnic table outside the Oval Office
on the South Lawn. We tried to meet at
least once every week. I surprisingly
was at the White House more than seven
hundred times during my four years as
Secretary.
15. I step off the plane for the first time
as Secretary of State in Tokyo, Japan, on
February 16, 2009. I broke with
tradition to make my first trip to Asia,
signifying our “pivot” to the region.
16. I loved reconnecting with Japanese
Empress Michiko, who was delighted
that I had decided to make Japan my first
stop as Secretary.
17. I visit with an adorable group of
students from the school President
Obama attended as a child in Jakarta,
Indonesia, in February 2009. Indonesia
is an emerging regional power and home
of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), an important partner
in our engagement in Asia.
18. In August 2009, Bill secured the
release of two detained American
journalists working for Current TV,
Laura Ling (center) and Euna Lee (right),
after negotiating with North Korean
dictator Kim Jong Il. Their return to the
United States was an emotional moment.
Standing with Bill are Current TV
founders Joel Hyatt and Former Vice
President Al Gore.
19. Secretary of Defense Bob Gates and
I peer through binoculars into isolated
North Korea at a guard post in the
demilitarized zone (DMZ) in July 2010.
20. A North Korean soldier stares at us
through the window as Bob Gates and I
tour a building in the DMZ, the most
fortified border in the world.
21. Watching traditional Indian dancers
at the Kalakshetra Foundation in
Chennai, India, in July 2011 reminded
me of the country’s rich history and
culture.
22. Chinese State Concilor Dai Bingguo
and I meet for the first time in February
2009 in Beijing. He once showed me a
picture of his granddaughter, remarking,
“This is what we’re in it for.”
23. Chinese Foreign Minister Yang
Jiechi visits me at the State Department
in March 2009. The rise of China is one
of the most consequential strategic
developments of our time. This isn’t a
relationship that fits neatly into
categories like friend or rival, and it
may never be. That is why I spent so
much of my time working to create the
right balance.
24. I join President Obama and Treasury
Secretary Tim Geithner with our
Chinese counterparts at the U.S.
Ambassador’s residence in London,
where we were all attending a meeting
of the G-20 in April 2009. From left to
right: State Councilor Dai Bingguo, Vice
Premier Wang Qishan, President Hu
Jintao, President Obama, me, and
Secretary Geithner.
25. When I learned America was one of
the only countries not participating in the
World Expo in Shanghai, China, I put
together a team to ensure that the USA
Pavilion would be a success. The best
part of my May 2010 visit to the Expo
was talking with the young Chinese and
American students.
26. The proudest moment for the
“MOTB” (Mother of the Bride):
Chelsea’s wedding on July 31, 2010, in
Rhinebeck, New York. Bill and I join
Chelsea and her husband, Marc, along
with my mom, Dorothy. It meant so much
to Chelsea to have her grandmother there
as she planned the wedding and married
Marc.
27. Chinese dissident Chen Guangcheng
is escorted out of the U.S. Embassy in
Beijing by, from left to right, Legal
Advisor Harold Koh, U.S. Ambassador
to China Gary Locke, and Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell.
28. I had the chance to meet Chen in
December 2013, in Washington, D.C.
29. With President Thein Sein of Burma
in his ornate ceremonial office in Nay
Pyi Taw in late 2011. I was the first U.S.
Secretary of State to visit the formerly
closed country in more than fifty years,
in an attempt to nurture democratic
progress.
30. I marvel at my surroundings as I tour
the exquisite Shwedagon Pagoda during
my visit to Rangoon, Burma, in
December 2011.
31. The first time I met the Burmese
Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu
Kyi in December 2011, we were both
wearing white. It seemed like an
auspicious coincidence. I felt as if we
had known each other for a lifetime,
even though we had just met.
32. On my return trip to the Shwedagon
Pagoda with President Obama, I struck
the enormous bell three times. We hoped
to send a message to the people of
Burma that America was interested in
engaging with them as well as their
government. (Notice my bare feet!)
33. As President Obama looks on, Aung
San Suu Kyi and I say farewell with an
emotional hug in November 2012. Suu
Kyi is an inspiration to her country and
to me, and I cherish the friendship we’ve
developed.
34. On December 1, 2009, sitting across
from President Obama and National
Security Advisor Jim Jones, and next to
Defense Secretary Bob Gates and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Mike
Mullen aboard Marine One, the
Presidential helicopter, on the way to
West Point, where President Obama
announced his decision to send
additional troops to Afghanistan.
35. General Stanley McChrystal,
commander of Coalition forces in
Afghanistan; Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke; and U.S. Ambassador to
Afghanistan Karl Eikenberry look on as I
shake hands with a NATO soldier upon
my arrival at the airport in Kabul,
Afghanistan, on November 18, 2009.
36. Richard Holbrooke speaks at an
April 2010 conference in Kabul with
Afghan President Hamid Karzai and
General David Petraeus.
37. Eating with President Karzai at the
Dumbarton Oaks estate in Washington,
D.C., in May 2010. I worked hard to
connect with Karzai. As with many
world leaders, respect and personal
courtesy went a long way.
38. I meet with Afghan women activists
at an international conference in Bonn,
Germany, in December 2011. After the
fall of the Taliban in 2001, I began
supporting Afghan women as they sought
new rights and opportunities.
39. The day after the 9/11 terrorist
attacks, I tour the devastation in Lower
Manhattan with New York Governor
George Pataki (left) and New York City
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani (center).
President Obama and I both felt that
defeating al Qaeda was crucial to our
national security, and that there should
be a renewed effort to find Osama bin
Laden and bring him to justice.
40. Students protest my visit in Lahore,
Pakistan, in October 2009. My staff
warned me that I would be a “punching
bag” in Pakistan because of the rising
tide of anti-American sentiment, but I
thought it was important to engage.
“Punch away,” I said.
41. I make final edits to a speech in
Pakistan in October 2011. I told the
Pakistanis that supporting Taliban
insurgents was asking for trouble, like
keeping poisonous snakes in your
backyard and expecting them to bite only
your neighbors. With, from left to right,
Huma Abedin, Ambassador to Pakistan
Cameron Munter, speechwriter Dan
Schwerin, Special Representative for
Afghanistan and Pakistan Marc
Grossman (seated), spokeswoman Toria
Nuland, and Philippe Reines.
42. In one of the most iconic photos—
and one of the most dramatic moments—
of my four years, we watch the Osama
bin Laden raid on May 1, 2011. Seated
around the table (from left): Vice
President Biden, President Obama,
Brigadier General Marshall B. “Brad”
Webb, Deputy National Security
Advisor Denis McDonough, me, and
Secretary Gates. Standing (from left):
Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs; National Security Advisor
Tom Donilon; Chief of Staff Bill Daley;
National Security Advisor to the Vice
President Tony Blinken; Audrey
Tomason, Director for Counterterrorism;
John Brennan, Assistant to the President
for Homeland Security; and Director of
National Intelligence Jim Clapper.
43. May 1, 2011: The end of a very long
day. The national security team listens as
President Obama tells the nation that
Osama bin Laden has been brought to
justice. Joining me are, seated from left
to right: James Clapper, Director of
National Intelligence; National Security
Advisor Tom Donilon; CIA Director
Leon Panetta; Admiral Mike Mullen,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff;
and Vice President Joe Biden.
44. After President Obama announced
that Osama bin Laden had been killed,
crowds gathered outside the White
House in celebration. We could hear the
chants of “USA! USA!”
45. Pictured here with me at the State
Department in July 2009, British Foreign
Secretary David Miliband was an
invaluable partner and friend. On our
first call he flattered me as “the right
Hercules for this task.”
46. Miliband’s successor as British
Foreign Secretary, William Hague, and I
talk during a United Nations Security
Council meeting on peace and security in
the Middle East in September 2012. The
eloquent Hague would also become a
close colleague and a good friend.
47. I admire a painting while on a tour of
Buckingham Palace in London, May
2011. Spending a night at the palace was
like stepping into a fairy tale.
48. Walking up the steps of the Élysée
Palace in Paris in January 2010 to greet
French President Nicolas Sarkozy, I
stepped out of my shoe, leaving me
barefoot in front of the press corps. He
gracefully took my hand and helped me
regain my footing. Later, I sent him a
copy of the photograph inscribed, “I may
not be Cinderella, but you’ll always be
my Prince Charming.”
49. German Chancellor Angela Merkel
has a great sense of humor. During a
lunch at the State Department in June
2011, Vice President Biden and I laugh
as she presents me with a framed
German newspaper. The front page
featured a photo of the two of us
standing side by side looking nearly
identical, but with our heads cropped
out. The paper challenged its readers to
guess which is Merkel and which is me.
50. I host my G-8 counterparts at Blair
House in Washington in April 2012.
From left to right: Koichiro Gemba of
Japan, Guido Westerwelle of Germany,
Sergey Lavrov of Russia, William
Hague of the United Kingdom, Alain
Juppé of France, John Baird of Canada,
Giulio Terzi di Sant’Agata of Italy, and
Catherine Ashton of the European Union.
51. Meeting with Turkish Prime Minister
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan at the
Dolmabahce Palace in Istanbul, Turkey,
in April 2012. Turkey was a growing
power in the region, and I spent hours
talking with Erdoğan about everything
from Iran to Libya to Syria.
52. Standing with Turkish President
Abdullah Gül (left), and Turkish Foreign
Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu (right)
overlooking Istanbul. I developed a
productive and friendly working
relationship with Davutoğlu that, though
strained numerous times, never ruptured.
53. With Russian Prime Minister
Vladimir Putin at his dacha just outside
Moscow in March 2010. Putin sees
geopolitics as a zero-sum game in
which, if someone is winning, then
someone else has to be losing. President
Obama and I discussed Putin’s threats
and how to counter them.
54. In June 2012, meeting with Russian
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in St.
Petersburg. We went from a high point
of working on a reset in our relationship
to a standoff over Syria. The reset led to
a number of early successes, including
imposing strong sanctions on Iran and
North Korea, before relations cooled
when Putin returned.
55. Waiting in my car outside a hotel in
Zurich, Switzerland, in October 2009, I
work the phones with my Assistant
Secretary for European and Eurasian
Affairs Phil Gordon to try to coax the
Armenian Foreign Minister out of his
room to sign an agreement with Turkey.
The New York Times described my
efforts as “down-to-the-wire, limousine
diplomacy.”
56. I wave to the crowds in Pristina,
Kosovo, in front of a huge statue of Bill,
who is revered for his role in ending the
war there in the 1990s. Across the plaza
was an adorable boutique with a
familiar name: Hillary. The shopkeeper
said they named the store after me “so
that Bill wouldn’t be lonely in the
square.”
57. Celebrating with the newly
inaugurated Brazilian President Dilma
Rousseff on January 1, 2011. She has a
strong intellect and true grit, two
characteristics necessary for leadership
in these challenging times.
58. Dressed in a green jacket, I’m
thrilled and surprised when a whale
comes quite close to our small boat off
the coast of Mexico in February 2012,
with other G-20 Foreign Ministers. Next
to me is our host, Mexican Foreign
Secretary Patricia Espinosa.
59. My time as Secretary wasn’t all
business. While in Cartagena, Colombia,
for the Summit of the Americas in April
2012, I joined staff for a birthday
celebration for my Assistant Secretary
for Western Hemisphere Affairs,
Roberta Jacobson. Later a State
Department spokesman was asked by the
media to quantify precisely how much
fun I had had and gave the official
response: “A lot.”
60. Greeting Chilean President Michelle
Bachelet at the airport in Santiago after a
major earthquake in early 2010.
61. In Monrovia, Liberia, I consult with
Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
during a visit in August 2009. The first
woman to serve as President of an
African country, Johnson Sirleaf is an
impressive leader, and I admire her
passion and perseverance.
62. One of the most heartbreaking trips I
took as Secretary was to a refugee camp
in Goma in the Democratic Republic of
Congo in August 2009. Here I tour the
camp and talk to people who face
deplorable conditions and an epidemic
of sexual violence.
63. Somalia’s transitional President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed surprised
many in his conservative religious
society by shaking my hand after our
August 2009 meeting in Nairobi, Kenya.
Helping his government beat back Al
Shabaab terrorists was a top national
security priority in Africa.
64. It was a privilege to meet Bishop
Elias Taban in Juba, South Sudan, in
August 2012. Bishop Taban’s
inspirational story touched me deeply,
and I took a copy of his powerful op-ed
to my meeting with South Sudanese
President Salva Kiir earlier that day.
65. Tanzanian Prime Minister Mizengo
Pinda and I do some planting at a
women’s cooperative in Mlandizi,
Tanzania, in June 2011 as part of our
Feed the Future initiative.
66. I sing and applaud with Malawian
women at the Lumbadzi Milk Bulking
Group in Lilongwe, Malawi, in August
2012. Fighting hunger and extreme
poverty was both the right and the smart
thing to do.
67. Finding out that there is a Hillary
Clinton Shop in Karatu, Tanzania, puts a
smile on my face.
68. Visiting HIV/AIDS patients at a
health clinic in Kampala, Uganda, in
August 2012. I set an ambitious new
goal of achieving an “AIDS-free
generation.” HIV may be with us well
into the future, but AIDS need not be.
69. After Nelson Mandela’s December
2013 memorial service in South Africa,
we sat telling stories and celebrating his
life and legacy, joined by our friend
Bono. Here Bono sits with me at the
piano. Bill got a kick out of my attempt
to hit a few keys.
70. President Obama and I tour the
Sultan Hassan Mosque in Cairo, Egypt,
in June 2009. Later that day President
Obama gave a speech at Cairo
University and offered an ambitious and
eloquent recalibration of America’s
relationship with the Islamic world.
71. Reconnecting with Nujood Ali, a
young Yemeni girl who successfully
fought for a divorce at age ten, during my
January 2011 visit to Sanaa, Yemen. In
our town hall meeting with young people
and activists, I suggested that Nujood’s
story should inspire Yemen to end child
marriage once and for all.
72. I walk with Special Envoy for
Middle East Peace George Mitchell to
President Obama’s remarks in the White
House Rose Garden on September 1,
2010, as direct peace talks begin
between the Israelis and Palestinians.
73. That night President Obama hosted a
working dinner in the Old Family Dining
Room of the White House. From left to
right (closest to camera): King Abdullah
II of Jordan, President Obama, and
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
From left to right (farthest from camera):
me, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
of Israel, President Mahmoud Abbas of
the Palestinian Authority, and Quartet
Special Envoy Tony Blair.
74. On September 2, 2010, I hosted the
first of three rounds of direct talks
between Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at the
State Department. Afterward, I joined
them and Special Envoy George
Mitchell for a chat in my office before
leaving them alone to talk.
75. As was so often the case, I am the
only woman in the room in this January
2011 meeting of the Gulf Cooperation
Council in Doha, Qatar. The next day, I
would warn Arab leaders, “In too many
places, in too many ways, the region’s
foundations are sinking into the sand.” I
am sitting between UAE Foreign
Minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan
(left) and Qatari Prime Minister Hamad
bin Jassim (right).
76. Standing in the Situation Room with
President Obama, National Security
Advisor Tom Donilon, Treasury
Secretary Tim Geithner, and Director of
National Intelligence Jim Clapper (all
seated), as we watch Egyptian President
Hosni Mubarak try to answer the
demands of protesters on February 1,
2011. His announcement was too little,
too late.
77. I shake hands with an Egyptian girl
in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, the heart of the
Arab Spring, on March 16, 2011.
78. After Muammar Qaddafi fled
Tripoli, I decided to visit Libya to offer
America’s support to the new
transitional government and urge them to
restore security as soon as possible.
Posing with a group of exuberant Libyan
militia fighters after landing in Tripoli in
October 2011.
79. I swear in Chris Stevens as the new
U.S. Ambassador to Libya in the State
Department’s Treaty Room on May 14,
2012, as his father, Jan Stevens, looks
on. Chris was a dedicated public servant
who was committed to helping build a
new Libya out of the wreckage of the
Qaddafi regime.
80. Protesters tear down the U.S. flag at
our embassy in Cairo on September 11,
2012, after an offensive video about the
Prophet Muhammad sparked anger
across the Muslim world.
81. President Obama signs a condolence
book in front of the State Department’s
memorial wall one day after the horrific
attacks in Benghazi, Libya. The
President visited the Department to
comfort the grieving colleagues of
Ambassador Chris Stevens and Sean
Smith.
82. With President Obama and Chaplain
Colonel J. Wesley Smith at Joint Base
Andrews, Maryland, on September 14,
2012, as we prepare to receive and
honor the remains of our colleagues
killed in Benghazi.
83. I appear before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee in January 2013 to
testify about the attack on our compound
in Benghazi.
84. With Sultan Qaboos of Oman in
Muscat in October 2011. The Sultan
helped us bring home three American
hikers detained in Iran and open a secret
diplomatic channel to discuss Iran’s
nuclear program.
85. Speaking at a UN Security Council
meeting on the crisis in Syria in New
York City in January 2012. Russia
blocked UN actions to address the
terrible violence in Syria even as the
situation deteriorated. The death toll
continues to rise, and millions have been
forced from their homes.
86. With President Obama in his hotel
suite in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, we
discuss whether I should fly to the
Middle East to try to broker a cease-fire
between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
Standing behind us (from left to right):
my Director of Policy Planning Jake
Sullivan, Deputy National Security
Advisor Ben Rhodes, and National
Security Advisor Tom Donilon.
87. Negotiating with Egyptian President
Mohamed Morsi in Cairo in November
2012, in an attempt to end the violence
in Gaza. Morsi helped me negotiate a
cease-fire between Israel and Hamas
that holds to this day.
88. President Obama and I crash a
meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, during
the UN Climate Change Conference in
December 2009. We interrupted Chinese
Premier Wen Jiabao, Brazilian President
Lula da Silva, Indian Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh, and South African
President Jacob Zuma at the crowded
table.
89. Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas
Gahr Støre and I discuss the impacts of
climate change aboard the Arctic
Research Vessel Helmer Hanssen
during a trip up a fjord off the coast of
Tromsø, Norway, in June 2012.
90. Touring an exhibition of old and new
cookstoves alongside Dr. Kalpana
Balakrishnan, a cookstove researcher,
during a visit to Chennai, India, in July
2011. I championed the use of cleanburning cookstoves around the world
instead of more traditional, dirty stoves
that burn wood or solid fuel and release
toxic fumes that contribute to the deaths
of millions of people every year,
especially women and children.
91. After landing in Haiti only four days
after the devastating earthquake in
January 2010, I sit in a tent with Haitian
Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive,
Haitian President René Préval, U.S.
Ambassador to Haiti Ken Merten, my
Counselor and Chief of Staff Cheryl
Mills, USAID Administrator Raj Shah,
and Lieutenant General Ken Keen to
discuss Haiti’s emergency response and
recovery.
92. Protesters greet me outside the
airport in Port-au-Prince in January
2011, during Haiti’s contested elections
a year after the earthquake. Haitians had
suffered so much, and they deserved to
have their votes counted and a peaceful
transfer of power, which is what they
finally got.
93. Bill and I are surrounded by Haitian
workers at the grand opening ceremony
of the new Caracol industrial park in
Haiti in October 2012. The Caracol
project was the centerpiece of our
efforts to restart Haiti’s economy, in
keeping with a broader trend in our
development work around the world of
shifting our focus from aid to investment.
94. Speaking about internet freedom at
the Newseum in Washington in January
2010. I put nations such as China,
Russia, and Iran on notice that the United
States would promote and defend an
internet where people’s rights are
protected and that is open to innovation,
interoperable all over the world, secure
enough to hold people’s trust, and
reliable enough to support their work.
95. Nearly twenty years after my
September 1995 speech in Beijing at the
UN’s Fourth World Conference on
Women, women’s rights remain
“unfinished business” in the 21st
century. As Secretary I focused on
defending the freedoms enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and making them real in the lives of
people all over the world.
96. With Melanne Verveer after
swearing her in as the first
Ambassadorat-Large for Global
Women’s Issues. Melanne helped me
weave a “full participation agenda” into
the fabric of American foreign policy.
97. One of our first steps in advancing
human rights was rejoining the UN
Human Rights Council. I address the
Council in Geneva, Switzerland, in
December 2011, advocating for the
rights of LGBT people around the
world.
98. In September 2012, I watch from
10,000 miles away in Timor-Leste as
Bill delivers the speech that earned him
the title “Secretary of Explaining
Things” at the Democratic National
Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina.
There was no CNN and limited internet,
but we managed to pull up the video on
our Ambassador’s home computer.
99. Deputy Secretaries Tom Nides (left)
and Bill Burns and Under Secretary Pat
Kennedy (right) join me as I say
farewell to the amazing men and women
of the State Department on my last day,
February 1, 2013. I walked out the same
entrance I had entered four years earlier,
proud of all the work we had
accomplished.
1. Surrounded by friends and supporters in the
National Building Museum in Washington,
D.C., I end my Presidential campaign on June
7, 2008, and endorse Barack Obama after
putting “18 million cracks” in the “highest,
hardest glass ceiling.”
2. After a long night of writing and rewriting,
Bill and I make final changes to my farewell
speech before leaving our home in Washington
on June 7, 2008.
3. Despite the hard-fought campaign, Barack
and I talk easily on the bus on the way to our
first joint event in June 2008 in Unity, New
Hampshire, a town chosen not only for its
name but also because we received exactly the
same number of votes there in the primary. The
rally in Unity was designed to send an
unmistakable message that the primary was
behind us, and we were now one team.
4. On December 1, 2008, in Chicago,
President-elect Obama announces me as his
choice to serve as the sixty-seventh Secretary
of State, along with the rest of his national
security team. Behind us are: National Security
Advisor–designate retired Marine General
James Jones, Vice President-elect Joe Biden,
Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Homeland
Security Secretary–designate Janet Napolitano,
and Attorney General–designate Eric Holder.
5. Vice President Biden administers my
ceremonial oath of office at the State
Department on February 2, 2009, while Bill,
Chelsea, and my mom, Dorothy, help hold the
Bible. I was officially sworn in a few weeks
earlier in my Senate office immediately after
the confirmation vote so I could get right to
work.
6. Walking through the lobby of the State
Department for the first time as Secretary on
January 22, 2009, I was overwhelmed and
humbled by the enthusiastic welcome.
7. Vice President Biden’s warmth and humor
would be very welcome during our long hours
in the White House Situation Room. We also
tried to meet for breakfast every week at the
Naval Observatory, his official residence.
8. I was honored to serve in President Obama’s
Cabinet, pictured here with President Obama
and Vice President Biden in the Grand Foyer of
the White House on July 26, 2012. Seated,
from left, are: Transportation Secretary Ray
LaHood, Acting Commerce Secretary Rebecca
Blank, U.S. Permanent Representative to the
United Nations Susan Rice, and Agriculture
Secretary Tom Vilsack. Standing in the second
row, from left, are: Education Secretary Arne
Duncan, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.,
Labor Secretary Hilda L. Solis, Treasury
Secretary Timothy F. Geithner, Chief of Staff
Jack Lew (who previously served as my Deputy
Secretary of State), me, Defense Secretary
Leon Panetta, Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric
K. Shinseki, Homeland Security Secretary
Janet Napolitano, and U.S. Trade
Representative Ron Kirk. Standing in the third
row, from left, are: Housing and Urban
Development Secretary Shaun Donovan,
Energy Secretary Steven Chu, Health and
Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius,
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar, Environmental
Protection Agency Administrator Lisa P.
Jackson, Office of Management and Budget
Acting Director Jeffrey D. Zients, Council of
Economic Advisers Chair Alan Krueger, and
Small Business Administration Administrator
Karen G. Mills.
9. With some of my extraordinary State
Department colleagues. My team was made up
of Foreign Service officers, career civil
servants, and advisors.
10. First Lady Michelle Obama and I bonded
over our shared experiences as First Ladies—
some of them humorous.
11. On my first full day on the job, President
Obama and Vice President Biden visit the State
Department to announce Richard Holbrooke
(left) as Special Representative for Afghanistan
and Pakistan and Senator George Mitchell
(right) as Special Envoy for Middle East Peace.
12. Grabbing a quick lunch at the State
Department cafeteria. I tried to eat regular
meals but it was often a challenge, particularly
on the road.
13. My senior advisors, from left to right, Jake
Sullivan, Philippe Reines, and Huma Abedin in
our home away from home, a special blue and
white U.S. Air Force 757. Over four years we
spent a total of eighty-seven full days in the air!
14. One fine day in April 2009 President
Obama suggested we finish a meeting at the
picnic table outside the Oval Office on the
South Lawn. We tried to meet at least once
every week. I surprisingly was at the White
House more than seven hundred times during
my four years as Secretary.
15. I step off the plane for the first time as
Secretary of State in Tokyo, Japan, on February
16, 2009. I broke with tradition to make my
first trip to Asia, signifying our “pivot” to the
region.
16. I loved reconnecting with Japanese
Empress Michiko, who was delighted that I had
decided to make Japan my first stop as
Secretary.
17. I visit with an adorable group of students
from the school President Obama attended as a
child in Jakarta, Indonesia, in February 2009.
Indonesia is an emerging regional power and
home of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), an important partner in our
engagement in Asia.
18. In August 2009, Bill secured the release of
two detained American journalists working for
Current TV, Laura Ling (center) and Euna Lee
(right), after negotiating with North Korean
dictator Kim Jong Il. Their return to the United
States was an emotional moment. Standing with
Bill are Current TV founders Joel Hyatt and
Former Vice President Al Gore.
19. Secretary of Defense Bob Gates and I peer
through binoculars into isolated North Korea at
a guard post in the demilitarized zone (DMZ) in
July 2010.
20. A North Korean soldier stares at us through
the window as Bob Gates and I tour a building
in the DMZ, the most fortified border in the
world.
21. Watching traditional Indian dancers at the
Kalakshetra Foundation in Chennai, India, in
July 2011 reminded me of the country’s rich
history and culture.
22. Chinese State Concilor Dai Bingguo and I
meet for the first time in February 2009 in
Beijing. He once showed me a picture of his
granddaughter, remarking, “This is what we’re
in it for.”
23. Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi
visits me at the State Department in March
2009. The rise of China is one of the most
consequential strategic developments of our
time. This isn’t a relationship that fits neatly
into categories like friend or rival, and it may
never be. That is why I spent so much of my
time working to create the right balance.
24. I join President Obama and Treasury
Secretary Tim Geithner with our Chinese
counterparts at the U.S. Ambassador’s
residence in London, where we were all
attending a meeting of the G-20 in April 2009.
From left to right: State Councilor Dai
Bingguo, Vice Premier Wang Qishan,
President Hu Jintao, President Obama, me, and
Secretary Geithner.
25. When I learned America was one of the
only countries not participating in the World
Expo in Shanghai, China, I put together a team
to ensure that the USA Pavilion would be a
success. The best part of my May 2010 visit to
the Expo was talking with the young Chinese
and American students.
26. The proudest moment for the “MOTB”
(Mother of the Bride): Chelsea’s wedding on
July 31, 2010, in Rhinebeck, New York. Bill
and I join Chelsea and her husband, Marc, along
with my mom, Dorothy. It meant so much to
Chelsea to have her grandmother there as she
planned the wedding and married Marc.
27. Chinese dissident Chen Guangcheng is
escorted out of the U.S. Embassy in Beijing by,
from left to right, Legal Advisor Harold Koh,
U.S. Ambassador to China Gary Locke, and
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell.
28. I had the chance to meet Chen in December
2013, in Washington, D.C.
29. With President Thein Sein of Burma in his
ornate ceremonial office in Nay Pyi Taw in late
2011. I was the first U.S. Secretary of State to
visit the formerly closed country in more than
fifty years, in an attempt to nurture democratic
progress.
30. I marvel at my surroundings as I tour the
exquisite Shwedagon Pagoda during my visit to
Rangoon, Burma, in December 2011.
31. The first time I met the Burmese Nobel
Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi in
December 2011, we were both wearing white.
It seemed like an auspicious coincidence. I felt
as if we had known each other for a lifetime,
even though we had just met.
32. On my return trip to the Shwedagon Pagoda
with President Obama, I struck the enormous
bell three times. We hoped to send a message
to the people of Burma that America was
interested in engaging with them as well as
their government. (Notice my bare feet!)
33. As President Obama looks on, Aung San
Suu Kyi and I say farewell with an emotional
hug in November 2012. Suu Kyi is an
inspiration to her country and to me, and I
cherish the friendship we’ve developed.
34. On December 1, 2009, sitting across from
President Obama and National Security Advisor
Jim Jones, and next to Defense Secretary Bob
Gates and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Mike
Mullen aboard Marine One, the Presidential
helicopter, on the way to West Point, where
President Obama announced his decision to
send additional troops to Afghanistan.
35. General Stanley McChrystal, commander
of Coalition forces in Afghanistan; Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke; and U.S. Ambassador to
Afghanistan Karl Eikenberry look on as I shake
hands with a NATO soldier upon my arrival at
the airport in Kabul, Afghanistan, on November
18, 2009.
36. Richard Holbrooke speaks at an April 2010
conference in Kabul with Afghan President
Hamid Karzai and General David Petraeus.
37. Eating with President Karzai at the
Dumbarton Oaks estate in Washington, D.C., in
May 2010. I worked hard to connect with
Karzai. As with many world leaders, respect
and personal courtesy went a long way.
38. I meet with Afghan women activists at an
international conference in Bonn, Germany, in
December 2011. After the fall of the Taliban in
2001, I began supporting Afghan women as
they sought new rights and opportunities.
39. The day after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, I
tour the devastation in Lower Manhattan with
New York Governor George Pataki (left) and
New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani
(center). President Obama and I both felt that
defeating al Qaeda was crucial to our national
security, and that there should be a renewed
effort to find Osama bin Laden and bring him to
justice.
40. Students protest my visit in Lahore,
Pakistan, in October 2009. My staff warned me
that I would be a “punching bag” in Pakistan
because of the rising tide of anti-American
sentiment, but I thought it was important to
engage. “Punch away,” I said.
41. I make final edits to a speech in Pakistan in
October 2011. I told the Pakistanis that
supporting Taliban insurgents was asking for
trouble, like keeping poisonous snakes in your
backyard and expecting them to bite only your
neighbors. With, from left to right, Huma
Abedin, Ambassador to Pakistan Cameron
Munter, speechwriter Dan Schwerin, Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan
Marc Grossman (seated), spokeswoman Toria
Nuland, and Philippe Reines.
42. In one of the most iconic photos—and one
of the most dramatic moments—of my four
years, we watch the Osama bin Laden raid on
May 1, 2011. Seated around the table (from
left): Vice President Biden, President Obama,
Brigadier General Marshall B. “Brad” Webb,
Deputy National Security Advisor Denis
McDonough, me, and Secretary Gates. Standing
(from left): Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs; National Security Advisor
Tom Donilon; Chief of Staff Bill Daley;
National Security Advisor to the Vice
President Tony Blinken; Audrey Tomason,
Director for Counterterrorism; John Brennan,
Assistant to the President for Homeland
Security; and Director of National Intelligence
Jim Clapper.
43. May 1, 2011: The end of a very long day.
The national security team listens as President
Obama tells the nation that Osama bin Laden
has been brought to justice. Joining me are,
seated from left to right: James Clapper,
Director of National Intelligence; National
Security Advisor Tom Donilon; CIA Director
Leon Panetta; Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and Vice President
Joe Biden.
44. After President Obama announced that
Osama bin Laden had been killed, crowds
gathered outside the White House in
celebration. We could hear the chants of “USA!
USA!”
45. Pictured here with me at the State
Department in July 2009, British Foreign
Secretary David Miliband was an invaluable
partner and friend. On our first call he flattered
me as “the right Hercules for this task.”
46. Miliband’s successor as British Foreign
Secretary, William Hague, and I talk during a
United Nations Security Council meeting on
peace and security in the Middle East in
September 2012. The eloquent Hague would
also become a close colleague and a good
friend.
47. I admire a painting while on a tour of
Buckingham Palace in London, May 2011.
Spending a night at the palace was like stepping
into a fairy tale.
48. Walking up the steps of the Élysée Palace
in Paris in January 2010 to greet French
President Nicolas Sarkozy, I stepped out of my
shoe, leaving me barefoot in front of the press
corps. He gracefully took my hand and helped
me regain my footing. Later, I sent him a copy
of the photograph inscribed, “I may not be
Cinderella, but you’ll always be my Prince
Charming.”
49. German Chancellor Angela Merkel has a
great sense of humor. During a lunch at the
State Department in June 2011, Vice President
Biden and I laugh as she presents me with a
framed German newspaper. The front page
featured a photo of the two of us standing side
by side looking nearly identical, but with our
heads cropped out. The paper challenged its
readers to guess which is Merkel and which is
me.
50. I host my G-8 counterparts at Blair House
in Washington in April 2012. From left to
right: Koichiro Gemba of Japan, Guido
Westerwelle of Germany, Sergey Lavrov of
Russia, William Hague of the United Kingdom,
Alain Juppé of France, John Baird of Canada,
Giulio Terzi di Sant’Agata of Italy, and
Catherine Ashton of the European Union.
51. Meeting with Turkish Prime Minister
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan at the Dolmabahce
Palace in Istanbul, Turkey, in April 2012.
Turkey was a growing power in the region, and I
spent hours talking with Erdoğan about
everything from Iran to Libya to Syria.
52. Standing with Turkish President Abdullah
Gül (left), and Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet
Davutoğlu (right) overlooking Istanbul. I
developed a productive and friendly working
relationship with Davutoğlu that, though
strained numerous times, never ruptured.
53. With Russian Prime Minister Vladimir
Putin at his dacha just outside Moscow in
March 2010. Putin sees geopolitics as a zerosum game in which, if someone is winning,
then someone else has to be losing. President
Obama and I discussed Putin’s threats and how
to counter them.
54. In June 2012, meeting with Russian
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in St.
Petersburg. We went from a high point of
working on a reset in our relationship to a
standoff over Syria. The reset led to a number
of early successes, including imposing strong
sanctions on Iran and North Korea, before
relations cooled when Putin returned.
55. Waiting in my car outside a hotel in Zurich,
Switzerland, in October 2009, I work the
phones with my Assistant Secretary for
European and Eurasian Affairs Phil Gordon to
try to coax the Armenian Foreign Minister out
of his room to sign an agreement with Turkey.
The New York Times described my efforts as
“down-to-the-wire, limousine diplomacy.”
56. I wave to the crowds in Pristina, Kosovo, in
front of a huge statue of Bill, who is revered
for his role in ending the war there in the
1990s. Across the plaza was an adorable
boutique with a familiar name: Hillary. The
shopkeeper said they named the store after me
“so that Bill wouldn’t be lonely in the square.”
57. Celebrating with the newly inaugurated
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff on January
1, 2011. She has a strong intellect and true grit,
two characteristics necessary for leadership in
these challenging times.
58. Dressed in a green jacket, I’m thrilled and
surprised when a whale comes quite close to
our small boat off the coast of Mexico in
February 2012, with other G-20 Foreign
Ministers. Next to me is our host, Mexican
Foreign Secretary Patricia Espinosa.
59. My time as Secretary wasn’t all business.
While in Cartagena, Colombia, for the Summit
of the Americas in April 2012, I joined staff
for a birthday celebration for my Assistant
Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs,
Roberta Jacobson. Later a State Department
spokesman was asked by the media to quantify
precisely how much fun I had had and gave the
official response: “A lot.”
60. Greeting Chilean President Michelle
Bachelet at the airport in Santiago after a major
earthquake in early 2010.
61. In Monrovia, Liberia, I consult with
Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf during
a visit in August 2009. The first woman to
serve as President of an African country,
Johnson Sirleaf is an impressive leader, and I
admire her passion and perseverance.
62. One of the most heartbreaking trips I took
as Secretary was to a refugee camp in Goma in
the Democratic Republic of Congo in August
2009. Here I tour the camp and talk to people
who face deplorable conditions and an
epidemic of sexual violence.
63. Somalia’s transitional President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed surprised many in his
conservative religious society by shaking my
hand after our August 2009 meeting in Nairobi,
Kenya. Helping his government beat back Al
Shabaab terrorists was a top national security
priority in Africa.
64. It was a privilege to meet Bishop Elias
Taban in Juba, South Sudan, in August 2012.
Bishop Taban’s inspirational story touched me
deeply, and I took a copy of his powerful op-ed
to my meeting with South Sudanese President
Salva Kiir earlier that day.
65. Tanzanian Prime Minister Mizengo Pinda
and I do some planting at a women’s
cooperative in Mlandizi, Tanzania, in June 2011
as part of our Feed the Future initiative.
66. I sing and applaud with Malawian women at
the Lumbadzi Milk Bulking Group in Lilongwe,
Malawi, in August 2012. Fighting hunger and
extreme poverty was both the right and the
smart thing to do.
67. Finding out that there is a Hillary Clinton
Shop in Karatu, Tanzania, puts a smile on my
face.
68. Visiting HIV/AIDS patients at a health
clinic in Kampala, Uganda, in August 2012. I
set an ambitious new goal of achieving an
“AIDS-free generation.” HIV may be with us
well into the future, but AIDS need not be.
69. After Nelson Mandela’s December 2013
memorial service in South Africa, we sat
telling stories and celebrating his life and
legacy, joined by our friend Bono. Here Bono
sits with me at the piano. Bill got a kick out of
my attempt to hit a few keys.
70. President Obama and I tour the Sultan
Hassan Mosque in Cairo, Egypt, in June 2009.
Later that day President Obama gave a speech
at Cairo University and offered an ambitious
and eloquent recalibration of America’s
relationship with the Islamic world.
71. Reconnecting with Nujood Ali, a young
Yemeni girl who successfully fought for a
divorce at age ten, during my January 2011 visit
to Sanaa, Yemen. In our town hall meeting with
young people and activists, I suggested that
Nujood’s story should inspire Yemen to end
child marriage once and for all.
72. I walk with Special Envoy for Middle East
Peace George Mitchell to President Obama’s
remarks in the White House Rose Garden on
September 1, 2010, as direct peace talks begin
between the Israelis and Palestinians.
73. That night President Obama hosted a
working dinner in the Old Family Dining Room
of the White House. From left to right (closest
to camera): King Abdullah II of Jordan,
President Obama, and President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt. From left to right (farthest
from camera): me, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu of Israel, President Mahmoud Abbas
of the Palestinian Authority, and Quartet
Special Envoy Tony Blair.
74. On September 2, 2010, I hosted the first of
three rounds of direct talks between Palestinian
Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at
the State Department. Afterward, I joined them
and Special Envoy George Mitchell for a chat
in my office before leaving them alone to talk.
75. As was so often the case, I am the only
woman in the room in this January 2011
meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council in
Doha, Qatar. The next day, I would warn Arab
leaders, “In too many places, in too many ways,
the region’s foundations are sinking into the
sand.” I am sitting between UAE Foreign
Minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan (left)
and Qatari Prime Minister Hamad bin Jassim
(right).
76. Standing in the Situation Room with
President Obama, National Security Advisor
Tom Donilon, Treasury Secretary Tim
Geithner, and Director of National Intelligence
Jim Clapper (all seated), as we watch Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak try to answer the
demands of protesters on February 1, 2011.
His announcement was too little, too late.
77. I shake hands with an Egyptian girl in
Cairo’s Tahrir Square, the heart of the Arab
Spring, on March 16, 2011.
78. After Muammar Qaddafi fled Tripoli, I
decided to visit Libya to offer America’s
support to the new transitional government and
urge them to restore security as soon as
possible. Posing with a group of exuberant
Libyan militia fighters after landing in Tripoli
in October 2011.
79. I swear in Chris Stevens as the new U.S.
Ambassador to Libya in the State Department’s
Treaty Room on May 14, 2012, as his father,
Jan Stevens, looks on. Chris was a dedicated
public servant who was committed to helping
build a new Libya out of the wreckage of the
Qaddafi regime.
80. Protesters tear down the U.S. flag at our
embassy in Cairo on September 11, 2012, after
an offensive video about the Prophet
Muhammad sparked anger across the Muslim
world.
81. President Obama signs a condolence book
in front of the State Department’s memorial
wall one day after the horrific attacks in
Benghazi, Libya. The President visited the
Department to comfort the grieving colleagues
of Ambassador Chris Stevens and Sean Smith.
82. With President Obama and Chaplain
Colonel J. Wesley Smith at Joint Base
Andrews, Maryland, on September 14, 2012, as
we prepare to receive and honor the remains of
our colleagues killed in Benghazi.
83. I appear before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee in January 2013 to
testify about the attack on our compound in
Benghazi.
84. With Sultan Qaboos of Oman in Muscat in
October 2011. The Sultan helped us bring
home three American hikers detained in Iran
and open a secret diplomatic channel to discuss
Iran’s nuclear program.
85. Speaking at a UN Security Council meeting
on the crisis in Syria in New York City in
January 2012. Russia blocked UN actions to
address the terrible violence in Syria even as
the situation deteriorated. The death toll
continues to rise, and millions have been
forced from their homes.
86. With President Obama in his hotel suite in
Phnom Penh, Cambodia, we discuss whether I
should fly to the Middle East to try to broker a
cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
Standing behind us (from left to right): my
Director of Policy Planning Jake Sullivan,
Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes,
and National Security Advisor Tom Donilon.
87. Negotiating with Egyptian President
Mohamed Morsi in Cairo in November 2012,
in an attempt to end the violence in Gaza.
Morsi helped me negotiate a cease-fire
between Israel and Hamas that holds to this day.
88. President Obama and I crash a meeting in
Copenhagen, Denmark, during the UN Climate
Change Conference in December 2009. We
interrupted Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao,
Brazilian President Lula da Silva, Indian Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh, and South African
President Jacob Zuma at the crowded table.
89. Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr
Støre and I discuss the impacts of climate
change aboard the Arctic Research Vessel
Helmer Hanssen during a trip up a fjord off the
coast of Tromsø, Norway, in June 2012.
90. Touring an exhibition of old and new
cookstoves alongside Dr. Kalpana
Balakrishnan, a cookstove researcher, during a
visit to Chennai, India, in July 2011. I
championed the use of clean-burning
cookstoves around the world instead of more
traditional, dirty stoves that burn wood or solid
fuel and release toxic fumes that contribute to
the deaths of millions of people every year,
especially women and children.
91. After landing in Haiti only four days after
the devastating earthquake in January 2010, I sit
in a tent with Haitian Prime Minister Jean-Max
Bellerive, Haitian President René Préval, U.S.
Ambassador to Haiti Ken Merten, my
Counselor and Chief of Staff Cheryl Mills,
USAID Administrator Raj Shah, and Lieutenant
General Ken Keen to discuss Haiti’s
emergency response and recovery.
92. Protesters greet me outside the airport in
Port-au-Prince in January 2011, during Haiti’s
contested elections a year after the earthquake.
Haitians had suffered so much, and they
deserved to have their votes counted and a
peaceful transfer of power, which is what they
finally got.
93. Bill and I are surrounded by Haitian
workers at the grand opening ceremony of the
new Caracol industrial park in Haiti in October
2012. The Caracol project was the centerpiece
of our efforts to restart Haiti’s economy, in
keeping with a broader trend in our
development work around the world of shifting
our focus from aid to investment.
94. Speaking about internet freedom at the
Newseum in Washington in January 2010. I put
nations such as China, Russia, and Iran on
notice that the United States would promote
and defend an internet where people’s rights
are protected and that is open to innovation,
interoperable all over the world, secure enough
to hold people’s trust, and reliable enough to
support their work.
95. Nearly twenty years after my September
1995 speech in Beijing at the UN’s Fourth
World Conference on Women, women’s rights
remain “unfinished business” in the 21st
century. As Secretary I focused on defending
the freedoms enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and making them
real in the lives of people all over the world.
96. With Melanne Verveer after swearing her
in as the first Ambassadorat-Large for Global
Women’s Issues. Melanne helped me weave a
“full participation agenda” into the fabric of
American foreign policy.
97. One of our first steps in advancing human
rights was rejoining the UN Human Rights
Council. I address the Council in Geneva,
Switzerland, in December 2011, advocating for
the rights of LGBT people around the world.
98. In September 2012, I watch from 10,000
miles away in Timor-Leste as Bill delivers the
speech that earned him the title “Secretary of
Explaining Things” at the Democratic National
Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina. There
was no CNN and limited internet, but we
managed to pull up the video on our
Ambassador’s home computer.
99. Deputy Secretaries Tom Nides (left) and
Bill Burns and Under Secretary Pat Kennedy
(right) join me as I say farewell to the amazing
men and women of the State Department on my
last day, February 1, 2013. I walked out the
same entrance I had entered four years earlier,
proud of all the work we had accomplished.
