Don’t you miss the mansion?” squealed a round-faced, wholesomelooking 20-something girl in a high-pitched voice.
“Um,” I started, unsure of how to answer her politely. “No . . . ?” I
said, offering her a halfhearted smile.
Here I was, an independent, successful woman, making millions
of dollars a year (all on my own), headlining a hit show on the Las Vegas Strip, coproducing and starring in my own television show, and
this woman was asking me if I missed the mansion?
Clearly the public perception of the life I shared with Hugh Hefner at the Playboy Mansion was a far, far cry from the actual reality I
experienced.
This question wasn’t really that uncommon. Fans would regularly
ask me about my time living what they assumed was this lavish, decadent life in Holmby Hills and whether I regretted my decision to
leave.
“Hef really fucked up when he let you go,” a young fan said, shaking her head, at a Las Vegas meet-and-greet. That was another one I
was regularly on the receiving end of.
“It’s okay,” I would always say. “I’m much better off now.”
I couldn’t—and still can’t—believe that these adult women were
actually serious. While filming the E! reality series The Girls Next
Door, I never thought of myself (or my two costars) as role models or
anyone to be taken seriously.
I thought people were just laughing at us. I thought of us as walking advertisements: “Don’t try this at home, kids.”
I’m not stupid. I know how unsavory that whole situation was.
You could read it all over my unsmiling face. Cameras often caught me
rolling my eyes or looking totally uninterested. As if I didn’t feel
trapped enough, I built up a wall around me. I’d gotten myself into a
bad situation, but I became distinctly aware that was not the impression fans walked away with.
The show was the epitome of mindless reality television, which
was fine. We all have our guilty pleasures that we like to unwind with
at the end of the day. There is something underneath the surface that
isn’t okay about it, though. Around the turn of the millennium, it became fashionable for women to appear stupid—to get by solely on
their looks and to be concerned only with fame and materialism. Some
of the effects of that moment in the zeitgeist still linger today.
And somewhere along the way, I too bought into the ludicrous
fantasy . . . perhaps even more so than others.
While there was a part of me that acknowledged the idiocy and
superficiality that surrounded me, I fell for the glamour: hook, line,
and sinker. It took years for me to realize just how manipulated and
used I had been. I could never admit that to myself at the time, because to do so would have been to acknowledge how dark and scary a
situation I was in . . . and how very little in control I was.
“I’m an adult. I’m here because I choose to be. I’m here for adventure, a once-in-a-lifetime experience. I’m here as a stepping-stone to
something else,” I routinely told myself. And perhaps the biggest disillusion: “I’m here for love.”
Deeper and deeper I fell down the rabbit hole.


Many people may think that I’m biting the hand that fed me and
that I should be grateful for the opportunity Girls Next Door and Playboy afforded me. And while I am grateful, it’s also clear to me that
most people fail to realize that there are two sides to every coin and
that even the most fantastic fairy tale has a dark underbelly. Being attached to Playboy can make people not want to have anything to do
with you, even in quirky, crazy Hollywood. There were many times the
hateful backlash made me wish I stayed the broke, awkward 21-yearold waitress I’d been before Hef came into my life.
When I finally did find the strength to leave the mansion, I began
receiving lucrative offers to reveal my version of events, but I never
pursued them. I wasn’t interested in writing a sensational tell-all for
the sole purpose of exposing someone else’s strange habits and dirty
secrets (don’t worry, you’ll find those things here, but in the context of
something bigger). I wanted to have my own story to tell, too.
To this day, it astounds me the number of misconceptions that
abound about my life and my experiences while at the mansion. Usually, the version of the story most flattering to Hef is the one that
prevails.
I’ve seen both sugarcoated and sensationalized accounts of life at
the mansion, but nothing I’ve ever read remotely resembles what I actually experienced. I always thought it would be classy to not kiss and
tell . . . but after a while you just get sick of having other people trying
to tell your story for you.
Hopefully, once you read my story, you will be able to understand
why I made some of the choices I made . . . and why I also felt trapped
by those choices. I hope that sharing my mistakes can prevent
someone else from making similar ones, or give someone the courage
to leave a bad situation.


This starts off as your typical “Small-Town Girl Goes to Hollywood” story that we’ve all heard a hundred times before. But it’s also
much more than that: it’s the unauthorized, never-before-told story of
the Playboy Mansion and the man that holds the key; it’s a behindthe-scenes account of reality television at its most decadent and absurd; it’s a cautionary tale; it’s the story of betrayal and abuse but ultimately of survival, success, and redemption; and finally it’s a real-life
fairy tale with heroines, villains, odd characters, strange happenings,
and, of course, a “Happily Ever After.”
Some of the names in this book have been changed to protect the
innocent . . . as well as some of the not so innocent. When you’ve journeyed into a dark world where publicity and fame are commodities so
deeply desired and unable to be bought, you’re hesitant to give some of
those people who have hurt you the attention they so desperately
crave. But I am here to set the record straight: the good, the bad, and
the ugly. The naked truth. I was born a girl with an insatiable appetite
for the extraordinary: the strange, the unusual, the glamorous, and the
morbid. And I experienced all of it.
So follow me down the rabbit hole . . . the truth may be stranger
than you imagine.

PROLOGUE

“I know who I was when I got up this morning, but
I think I must have been changed several times
since then.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

1988
It wasn’t the most lavish-looking present under the tree. The flat,
square package was wrapped in simple green and white paper with a
glossy red drugstore-bought bow and addressed to me from my aunt.
When I was nine, Christmas wasn’t necessarily the spectacular
event it had been in years past. I wasn’t particularly interested in toys
anymore, but I wasn’t yet mature enough to appreciate the more practical presents.
Holding the soft object in my hand, I didn’t expect much.
Carefully, I peeled away a corner of the paper to reveal what appeared to be the bright blue cover of a book. With a bit more eagerness, I tore away the remaining wrap and read aloud the words: Marilyn Monroe Paper Dolls.
Of course I had heard of Marilyn Monroe before. Madonna had
spent most of the ’80s replicating the movie star—most memorably in


her 1985 Material Girl music video—and like most fourth-grade girls,
I idolized the pop singer. But I don’t recall ever seeing Marilyn before
this moment.
Smiling up at me from the cover of this gorgeous book were two
illustrations of the starlet: one dressed in a black-sequined showgirl
costume and top hat from her 1953 movie Gentlemen Prefer Blondes
and one in a casual pink sweater and capris with flowing blond curls
from 1952’s Clash by Night.
Flipping through the thick, glossy pages I saw a variety of costumes from her most famous roles: a pageant swimsuit with sash and
tiara from We’re Not Married (1952); a cream gown with a pink and
purple, frilly kimono wrap from The Prince and the Showgirl (1957); a
green and yellow Bo Peep–inspired ensemble from one of her earliest
roles; and so many more.
More than 30 different costumes (including one of the starlet in
nothing but a bathrobe draped over her otherwise naked body) filled
the pages to dress the bikini-clad Marilyn Monroe cutout figure. On
the back of the book was a biography, detailing how the orphan Norma
Jeane became one of the world’s greatest movie stars.
With extra special care, I methodically cut out the figure and each
of her glittering outfits. I spent hours dressing and re-dressing my
Marilyn doll, imagining how she must have felt in each moment: the
weight of those gilded gowns, the sounds of an active movie set, the
wondrous eyes of the countless admirers, and the decadent Hollywood
parties I could only dream about.
My little world felt so limiting. As my family bounced from Oregon to Alaska, then eventually back to Oregon again, no place ever felt
like home. I grew up hunting, fishing, reading, and playing in the
woods in Alaska; when I arrived in Oregon I was a fish out of water.
The kids in my new school loved two things and two things only:


sports (which I had never played) and video games (which I couldn’t
afford). Not to mention, my social skills were lacking. I frequently
tried to reinvent my image, my group of friends, and my hobbies, but
nothing ever felt like me. The other kids treated me like an outsider
because they thought I was different.
They were right—I was different. I dreamt of a world outside my
little rain-soaked suburban bubble. I’d fantasize about a glamorous career and all the amazing costumes I would wear one day. I thought
that if I wished hard enough, perhaps I would fall down the rabbit hole
and find myself in a decadent world beyond my wildest dreams.
And Norma Jeane Mortenson did that—didn’t she? She escaped
her boring existence and became Marilyn Monroe.
Quickly, my fascination with the star escalated. Every Sunday
morning, I would grab the newspaper and pull out the TV guide. My
eyes would scan over the programming list searching for the titles of
any of her movies listed in the book.
The first one I finally came across was Bus Stop (1956). I set up
our family VHS player to record it when my parents weren’t looking.
They let me keep the paper dolls, but they didn’t really care for
Madonna or Marilyn or such frivolous fascinations. I found that first
film a little dull—some of the nuances in Bus Stop went right over my
nine-year-old head. After all, they couldn’t always spell everything out
in the 1950s.
As weeks became months, my VHS collection grew and I became
acquainted with most of Monroe’s better-known pictures. How to
Marry a Millionaire quickly became my favorite, mainly for the
campy 1950s fashions on screen.
Yes, I know what you’re thinking. I’m almost embarrassed to admit that because of the film’s title, but the title and plot had nothing to
do with why I liked it. I loved the three main characters. They were


just too irresistible: model roommates played by Lauren Bacall (the
smart one), Marilyn (the romantic one), and Betty Grable (the athletic
one who always said what was on her mind).
As for Marilyn herself, I was absolutely enchanted with the glamorous creature whose beauty transcended the small television set in
my family’s living room. On screen, she appeared to have everything
she ever dreamed of: fame, beauty, fortune, and, of course, love.
Someday I’ll know what it’s like, I thought. Someday I’ll know
what it’s like to have it all.

2002
If I just put my head under the water and take a deep breath in, it
would all be over, I thought. The bathroom was empty as I swam
alone in the giant marble tub. The air was chilly inside the mansion
walls, with a draft that always seemed to rustle through the rooms. I
pulled my shoulders under the warm water and rested my stoned eyes
on the wall opposite me. But could I really do it? I dipped my toes in
and out of the water and listened for the quiet echo the splash made as
it bounced off the tile walls, feeling like an exotic fish trapped in some
enormous aquarium. Outside the bathroom, the mansion was eerily
quiet.
It was unusually calm at this hour of the night. We spent yet another evening out at one of Hollywood’s hottest nightclubs (like clockwork, we went clubbing every Wednesday and Friday), before coming
home and retiring to Hef’s room, where we all smoked weed and went
through the weird bi-weekly “bedroom routine” (which was nothing
like most people imagined it to be). To an outsider, our evenings
looked incredibly glamorous: seven beautiful women dancing the
night away behind velvet ropes and bulging security guards, private


table service to cater to our every desire, and exclusive access to the
club—all at the expense of the world’s most notorious boyfriend: Hugh
Hefner. But if you looked close enough, each girl appeared to be just a
little bit vacant and merely going through the motions of what life
ought to be. Life inside the mansion wasn’t at all what I expected to
be—not even close.
Everyone thinks that infamous metal gate was meant to keep
people out. But I grew to feel it was meant to lock me in. I wasn’t quite
sure how I ended up in this curious, often dark world, but I was petrified by my own fear of what it would mean to ever leave. Tucked away
inside Hugh Hefner’s rolling Los Angeles estate, I was controlled by a
spur-of-the-moment decision I made at 22 years old that I had grown
to deeply regret despite the extravagant world it afforded me. It was a
decision that changed the course of my life.
I had to believe that there was a greater purpose for the choices I
had made: whether it was to help advance my career or whether it was
truly for love. And depending on the month, the week, and sometimes
even the hour of the day, I would waffle back and forth between precisely why I was living a life as nothing more than “Girlfriend Number
One” to a man who was old enough to be my grandfather. I didn’t want
to admit that I had sold a bit of my soul for the chance at fame.
Would anyone even miss me? It’s amazing the dark places your
mind can wander when you’re depressed. The depths of my own depression had led me down this very dark path, and there was no
gleaming light, however distant, at the end of this tunnel. Maybe it was
the pot and the alcohol, but drowning myself seemed like a logical way
to escape the ridiculous life I was leading. I just couldn’t take my
misery anymore. Of course my family would be devastated, but I rarely
saw them enough for my absence to make a difference.


From a distance, it appeared as though the girlfriends’ days consisted of bopping around Beverly Hills shops, driving flashy cars, and
toting designer handbags. I played the part of the perfect girlfriend
well: a bubbly, fun-loving, carefree girl who loved her dogs, her lifestyle, and, most important, her boyfriend. Playing that role quickly became second nature, and the blurred lines of reality made it so that
some days I struggled to even remember what I was like before moving into the mansion. It was like a high-stakes version of teenage politics: sometimes you try so hard to fit in that you almost forget it’s all an
act. I was afforded many things while I lived in the Playboy Mansion
. . . but never the opportunity for the sort of self-discovery most 20-somethings enjoy.
Public criticism and speculation have always trailed Hef and his
harem of young, blond girlfriends: “Do they all sleep with him?” the
more conservative folks would wonder. “It’s all an act. They’re just
paid to be arm candy,” the younger crowd would usually surmise.
“How does he keep up with them all?” the older men marveled. But life
inside the Playboy Mansion wasn’t exactly the sexy fairy tale my exboyfriend would have you believe. In fact, it was like a bedazzled, twisted prison where the inmates developed their own hazing and hierarchy and where the release back into society was the equivalent of being excommunicated.
How would the other girlfriends react to my death? Among the
seven girlfriends, I had only one friend: Bridget Marquardt. Surely she
would be distraught over my death, but I couldn’t imagine the others
girls would shed even a single tear. The climate inside the mansion
was toxic. I didn’t participate in the cocaine benders, the side boyfriends, or all their harebrained moneymaking schemes that were all
in direct violation of Hef’s house rules. I rarely left the mansion, so
making it home in time for curfew was never an issue either. Needless


to say, my goody-two-shoes reputation wasn’t the most welcome
among this group of girls. In fact, they’d probably view my unexpected
demise as an opportunity to get away with more shit as Hef busied
himself with the public relations rollout regarding a death at the mansion. Not to mention, it would mean less competition. Yep, they would
be glad I was gone.
Would Hef even feel bad when he heard the news? He’d probably
be completely shocked. In his eyes, as long as each girlfriend had a
substantial allowance to buy nice things—and the ability to bask in the
reflection of his fame—that’s all she needed to be happy. He would
surely never concede that my misery had anything to do with him or
the life he provided. Would he even miss me? No, I was certain I was
just another warm body—as we all were. “Just another blonde,” I
could hear him say. Internally, I decided he would label it a devastating accident. His main concern would be navigating Playboy out of
any sort of PR crisis. A small memorial might even be held at the mansion, but it would glorify my days at Playboy and with Hef, once again
promoting the idea that life inside those walls was nothing short of
paradise.
And just like that, I would be swept under the rug with every other scandal and ghost that once plagued Hugh Hefner . . . and my
memory would involuntarily serve as yet another public reminder of
the beauty that is Playboy.
I think that knowing my death would be in vain convinced me not
to go through with it. In truth, I didn’t really want to die, but I saw no
other way out. Thankfully the only thing greater than my need to escape was my desire to share my experience. If I sunk my head below
the water and went to sleep, no one would ever know the truth.


Eventually I’ll tell my story, I thought. I wasn’t sure when and I
wasn’t sure how, but someday I would fight my way out. Someday I
would be whole again.

CHAPTER 1

“Begin at the beginning,” the King said, very
gravely, “and go on till you come to the end.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

Slowly, the large iron gates surrounding the infamous compound
creaked open and our shuttle began its ascent up the steep driveway.
My nose was pressed so tightly against the window—anxious to spot
any sign of the luxurious Holmby Hills estate expertly hidden by the
lush foliage—that my makeup smudged on the glass. Over my
shoulder, I heard a fellow partygoer point out the first glimpse of the
20,000-square-foot Gothic Tudor that was steadily coming into view.
“There it is!” a man in silk pajamas shouted. I craned my neck to
spot the roof and fixed my eyes on the horizon as the mansion began
to surface. Like an early morning sunrise, it was magic. The estate—situated on five rolling acres in one of L.A.’s most prestigious
neighborhoods—looked like a castle from a fairy tale. My large eyes
widened, trying to fully absorb this moment.
As the shuttle reached the top of the driveway, my girlfriend
Heather spotted the infamous “Playmates at Play” sign and nudged me
in the ribs.


“Look!” she said, her smile so large I thought it was about to snap
off her cheeks. We both burst into laughter. We were positively giddy.
We are actually here, I thought. I made it to the mansion. It had become a goal of mine to see the inside of these walls, and I told myself
that I could now happily check that one off the bucket list. I even
wondered if I would meet Gatsby himself . . . Mr. Hugh Hefner.
MY STORY WASN’T ATYPICAL: a small-town girl—farmer’s daughter, so to
speak—who dreamt of becoming someone extraordinary.
There were less than 10,000 residents in my hometown, and my
high school graduating class was smaller than the guest list to most
Hollywood parties (since then, it has seen a boost in tourism thanks in
part to the Twilight movies, but let me assure you, there was no Edward Cullen sauntering through my lunchroom).
After graduation, I moved 30 miles away to attend Portland State
University. Which didn’t feel far enough, but it was the best I could do.
It was early 1999 and I was in my second year in college when I
heard on the news that Playboy’s “Millennium Playmate” search was
coming to Portland. Immediately, my mind started to wander. I found
Oregon’s weather depressing and didn’t feel like opportunity exactly
lurked around every corner there. I had been thinking a lot about moving to Los Angeles to try my luck, but I didn’t know anyone in L.A. or
have the financial means to make such a big move.
Apparently, according to the report, the magazine had been conducting a nationwide “on the road” search for the “Millennium Playmate.” A gigantic tour bus traveled the United States (and Canada),
stopping in 45 cities testing candidates. The girl chosen would receive
$200,000, would appear inside the January 2000 issue of Playboy,
and would be flown around the world to represent the men’s magazine


for the entire year. It sounded like just the opportunity I was looking
for!
This wasn’t the first time Playboy popped up on my radar. As was
true with many children of the ’80s, it wasn’t abnormal for us to have
a Playboy magazine arrive at the house. I even remember my mom
and dad studying the front cover of a Playboy once to find the hidden
rabbit head. As a kid, you think that sounds like a pretty fun game, but
we were quickly told that it was “for adults only.” One day my sister
and I were scouring the house for any Christmas presents my mom
may have hidden when we came across a few Playboys that had been
hidden away. We flipped through in absolute hysterics, pointing out
all the bare butts. I was a kid, so I thought it was hilarious!
While Playboy wasn’t completely foreign to my home, it still felt
rebellious. I knew that if I auditioned for the “Millennium Playmate”
and happened to be chosen, my parents wouldn’t be thrilled at the
prospect of me posing naked, but possibly would have respected my
decision. It was a reputable magazine with a storied history, so it felt
edgy but also somehow safe.
Plus, at the time many of Hollywood’s biggest stars were appearing in the magazine: Cindy Crawford, Jenny McCarthy, Drew Barrymore, etc. Not to mention, my icon Marilyn Monroe was Playboy’s
first ever cover girl. Naturally, I too had pipe dreams about one day
being in the magazine.
This is perfect, I thought. I’m going to audition!
According to the news report, the process was quite simple: call
the provided number, make an appointment, and show up with your
favorite bikini.
That’s when my genius idea to fast-track my stardom hit its first
speed bump: I didn’t actually own a bikini. In my defense, I lived in
Oregon. Why would I need a bikini? And when I say things were tight


financially, I mean they were tight. But I decided it was about time to
make an investment in my future. After calling the number, getting the
address where the bus would be stationed, and securing an audition
time the following week, I went shopping.
Needless to say, Portland wasn’t brimming with retail shops specializing in swimwear, but I remembered seeing one downtown near
my college campus, so I popped in to see what I could find. I didn’t
really know where to begin. Obviously, I had never taken photos in a
bikini before (this was about 15 years before “selfies” became popular),
so I didn’t know what I should be looking for. After scouring the racks
for the best deal, I decided on a silver metallic bikini that was both
sexy but also one that I felt reasonably comfortable in.
Before the audition, I figured I should probably get some kind of
tan. There weren’t too many sunny days in the Pacific Northwest, so
my complexion was incredibly light (particularly when coupled with
blond hair and a silver swimsuit). I went to the nearby tanning salon
and had my first experience with a tanning bed. I was terrified of going
to my audition bright red, so I asked for the lowest possible voltage. It
wasn’t a drastic difference, but it did the job.
As I pulled into the address I had been given, I spotted the tour
bus immediately. It was so large that it stood out like a sore thumb in
the hotel parking lot it was stationed in. When I arrived, I was ushered
inside the hotel lobby with the other “potential playmates” to fill out
some paperwork before stepping onto the bus for the audition. Over
my new metallic bikini, I wore a barely above-the-knee black
“miniskirt” and a white button-down blouse in hopes of capturing that
“girl next door” image photographers were apparently looking for.
And, to be honest, it was also the sexiest outfit I owned.
To tell the truth, I was a bundle of nerves; I had never modeled
before, so the idea that I’d be posing practically nude was terrifying.


But I figured that since editors were hoping to discover new talent,
they were expecting girls to be relatively inexperienced. On the bus, I
envisioned a few stylists helping candidates with hair and makeup
touch-ups and a distinguished photographer guiding the amateur
models into the most flattering poses. Don’t get me wrong, I knew it
wasn’t a full-blown shoot, but I expected at least a little help. It was
Playboy, after all.
After a few minutes of waiting, I was escorted to the gigantic
45-foot-long tour bus with two other girls. We were made to wait in
the ultra-lux “living room” area, which was wrapped in leather with a
seven-foot movie screen in the back. I remember thinking that it was
nicer than any home I’d ever been in. Framed portraits of Playboy’s
most iconic covers hung on the walls that reached up to a mirrored
glass ceiling. A man with a clipboard walked into the room and greeted
us. He gave us a brief history of the magazine and then asked that we
go around the room and introduce ourselves and say why we were
there.
One girl looked like a Pamela Anderson–inspired stripper with
white poufy hair, a clingy silvery dress, and clear-plastic platform
heels (and appeared to have brought her pimp with her). For a moment, I remember wondering if she was actually a female impersonator. There weren’t too many women like her running around Portland
at the time and I was so distracted by her appearance that, for the life
of me, I can’t recall a single thing she said.
The other girl was pretty, but not too remarkable, and I’d guess
about 10 years older than me.
“I came to try out because I’ve always wanted to be a Playmate,”
she gushed. The man with the clipboard smiled and nodded, pretending not to have heard this response more than 20,000 times already.


“And me and my best friend have a bet on who would become one
first. I want to be Miss April.”
Then it was my turn.
“I’ve always dreamed of moving to Los Angeles and becoming an
actress,” I explained, the other two candidates glaring at me. “I love
Marilyn Monroe and she was the first Playmate, so that’s why I want
to be in Playboy.”
For some reason, each of us believed we were total shoe-ins. I
mean, I really thought I had a shot. Knowing what I know now,
though, none of us ever stood a chance.
After the meet-and-greet, each girl was called one by one into the
onboard “photo studio.” When my name was called, I stood up and
pressed the creases out of my skirt before making my way into the
room.
It all felt very rushed. Besides the photographer, the room was
empty—no stylists or coaches to speak of.
“Hi, Holly, how are you?” the photographer said, staring down at
my application in his hand and guiding me towards a white backdrop.
“This will be great. Just relax. Have fun.”
I was instructed to strip down to my bikini for the first photograph. Brimming with nerves, I did what I was told.
“Awesome, great,” the photographer said hurriedly. “Now, can
you take off your top?”
Oh shit! He wants me to do what? I thought. He’s not going to
take pictures of my boobs. Is he?
It was incredibly naïve; I know that now. I had figured that the
first round of photos were just to see if you were cute enough to be
called back and then perhaps we’d discuss the possibility of more revealing photos. I wasn’t expecting to get naked at that very moment.


Begrudgingly, I shed my top for a photo. Given how incredibly
awkward I felt, I can’t imagine it was the most flattering photograph.
Immediately, I felt the urge to do some kind of damage control. I had
signed my life away on the photo release, so could they use these photos even if I wasn’t selected?
“Um,” I said, clearing my throat. “Could you make a note or
something that you don’t have my permission to use these pictures unless I’m selected?”
The photographer gave me a weird look, clearly not expecting that
kind of reaction from a girl auditioning for Playboy.
“Okay, I’ll make that note,” he said before scribbling something
down on my application. That was it, ten minutes and I was done.
Now looking back, I don’t think I could have done anything more
damaging to my chances. “Hi, I’m Holly. I want to be in Playboy but
don’t use my topless photo.” But at the time, I wasn’t prepared for it.
Of course I had hopes of becoming the “Millennium Playmate,” but I
sure as hell didn’t want a topless photo of myself snapped in the back
of a bus to be printed in the magazine (worrying about it appearing
online wasn’t even a consideration back then). What if they did a
spread of all the girls that auditioned?
Not too surprisingly, I never heard a word from them.
When the Millennial Playboy issue eventually came out, a set of
Peruvian twins graced the centerfold (the girls were models from
Miami who never even stepped foot on the Playboy bus; the “tour”
was mostly a publicity stunt for the January issue).
Wow, twins! I thought. I never stood a chance.
In the previous issue was a four-page spread called “Girls of the
Millennium Search” showcasing collages of nude photos from the girls
who auditioned on the bus. It was exactly the type of story I wanted to


avoid. Frantically, I scanned the pages but didn’t see my photo
anywhere.
Thank God I said something. Although after signing the paperwork, I’m pretty sure the editors could have done whatever they
wanted with my photo. Yet, while I didn’t want to end up in some
throwaway section of the magazine, I had to admit I felt a bit defeated.
I thought I’d blown my opportunity to appear in Playboy.
It wound up being six years—and a very strange twist of fate—before my next chance at a pictorial.
In the meantime, I’d decided to transfer schools so I could make
my way to Los Angeles.
Before I left, however, there was one thing I needed to do.
I TOOK A DEEP breath as I plunked three brand-new credit cards down
on the receptionist’s desk. Like every college student, I had received a
slew of credit card offers in the mail and applied for as many as I could
get. Since the limits were so low, it took three cards to cover the
$7,000-plus my new set of breast implants would cost me.
As each card swiped through the machine—maxing out one after
the other—I carefully filled out the paperwork with nervous excitement. You might think my failed Playboy casting was the reason I was
now sitting in the doctor’s office preparing for an expensive cosmetic
procedure, but that was really just the straw that broke the camel’s
back. For the past several years I had struggled with insecurities about
my chest—or lack thereof. I’d always been naturally curvy from the
waist down, but from the waist up, I was as skinny as a stick figure.
This had plagued me through high school and I spent those years
perpetually armed with a heavily stuffed Wonderbra. I wasn’t trying to
appear stacked per se—I was just trying to balance the proportions of


my body while I waited for the bombshell chest I was certain I would
one day develop. I remember gaping at Anna Nicole Smith’s GUESS
ads when I was in junior high, hopeful that I would be just as voluptuous one day, but it never happened. (I even sent away for herbal supplements “guaranteed” to increase your chest by two cup sizes! Surprise! They didn’t work. I actually called and got my money back.)
The nurse led me into the preop room and instructed me to
change into the scratchy hospital gown. I had never had even the most
minor surgery before, but I was young, fearless, and determined to
look my best. After all, you only live once, right? I was sure I would
pay the credit cards off in a timely manner. It was no big deal.
After the procedure, I woke up feeling like I had been run over by
a garbage truck. The doctor had made the surgery sound so simple
during my consultation that I actually thought I would be up on my
feet that same day. Foolishly, I planned on keeping the entire ordeal a
secret from my parents. I wasn’t in the habit of discussing my private
anatomy with my mom and dad, and since I’d been stuffing my bras
religiously for years, I figured they wouldn’t even notice. There was no
way they would have allowed me to pile on all this massive credit card
debt in one swoop, but I didn’t want to hear anyone’s advice (I was always one of those stubborn kids who insisted on learning things the
hard way).
The nurse rolled me out of the facility in a wheelchair to meet my
friend who was scheduled to pick me up. Slumped over in the passenger seat, I realized there was no way I could keep this from my parents. After she pulled into the driveway and walked me to the front
door, I not so gracefully stumbled through the entryway and flopped
on my parents couch, clutching a barf bag full of bile to my chest. In
this state, I had to explain the whole ordeal to them as they shook their


heads with a mixture of amusement and amazement. Luckily for me, I
had long been rebellious and they were used to my crazy antics.
After a few days of recovery where I felt like an elephant was sitting on my chest, I finally made it to the mall to buy my first post-surgery bra. As I tried on a handful, I finally found a perfect fit. I looked
at the tag on the lacey white Victoria’s Secret Dream Angels bra: a
34D! The surgeon had told me he couldn’t guarantee what size my
breasts would end up being—I had asked for a C cup using a topless
photo of a Playmate as inspiration. I couldn’t believe I was a D cup—I
was huge!
While I don’t regret the surgery (I couldn’t have been happier
with my body), the credit card debt would end up becoming too much
for me to pay off in a timely manner—contributing to money troubles
that would end up haunting me in the years to come.
Shortly after the surgery, with roughly $100 in my bank account, I
packed up my battered red Toyota Celica and made my way, like
countless girls before me, down the Pacific Coast for a chance at “making it.” After two years at Portland State University, I transferred my
credits to Loyola Marymount, a private university about five miles
south of Santa Monica. I was earning a double major in psychology
and theater arts and figured there was no better place to study acting
than in L.A.
Student housing was already at capacity when I arrived, so transfer students were put up at a hotel across from campus (two students
to a room) until we could make other arrangements. I thought it was
so cool getting to live in a hotel and I didn’t want to have to move out
after my first semester. Not to mention, apartments in Los Angeles
were really pricey and I was anxious about having to eventually factor
that into my already tight budget.


I hadn’t been in Southern California more than 24 hours before I
realized I needed a relatively well paying job—and quickly!
At a friend’s suggestion, I headed to the Hooters in Santa Monica
to apply for a waitressing gig. Much to my surprise, I was hired on the
spot.
Thank God for my new boobs, I thought.
My first day on the job, the manager handed me the signature
“Hooters Girl” outfit and motioned for me to go change. When I
emerged from the stall in the women’s restroom, I paused to take a
long look at myself in the mirror.
How can I go out on the floor in this outfit? I thought. I had never
felt so naked in an outfit before. The breeze of the air-conditioning
went right through the thin tank top and tiny spandex shorts as if I
wore nothing at all. And the shorts were so tiny, the girls’ butt cheeks
always hung out of the bottoms. I often thought the restaurant should
have been called Cheekers. The only blessing was the nylons. Hooters
Girls were required to wear tan pantyhose to make their legs look flawless, but to me they also added a measure of decency.
Suck it up, Holly, I thought. My dream was always to make
something of myself, and by allowing me to afford to stay in L.A., this
job was a means to that end. I had read an article about Hooters Girls
in Jane magazine that highlighted how much cash they earned in tips.
There was no way I was giving up this opportunity.
I fixed my hair, put a smile on my face, and walked out the door.
And you know what? It really wasn’t that bad. I soon learned to love
my job.
After a short time in the city, I settled into a tiny Westwood apartment with my friend Nora. Besides a mattress, a lamp, and a pile of
schoolbooks, my room was all but empty. My Hooters salary was
barely covering my daily expenses, so I relied heavily on scholarships


in order to pay for a portion of the hefty tuition at the private university. What was left over for me to pay? . . . Well, let’s just say it went
unpaid for quite some time.
I was 20 years old and almost delusionally confident and optimistic. I was convinced I could do anything I could put my mind to . . .
even become a famous actress and get my college degree within a few
years. I knew I wasn’t always the hottest girl in the room, but I also
knew I wanted success so badly that I would work harder than anyone
else for it. For a while, I did manage to juggle it all: the school, the job,
and the auditions. There was only so much longer I could keep up it
up, though. I was burning the candle at both ends and something was
bound to give.
As it happens with transfers, many of my credits from Portland
State didn’t apply towards my program at Loyola Marymount. In order
to graduate on time, I’d have to load up on credits, which included
long theater hours that would require working backstage on different
productions during the evenings when I typically waitressed. I knew
that with a packed school schedule and a full-time job, I wouldn’t have
any time to study. And if I couldn’t study, I wouldn’t be able to meet
the minimum grade requirements of my scholarships. So after a year
at LMU, I decided to take a break from school to focus on pursuing my
career. I would never be as young or as eager as I was in that moment,
and I figured that I might as well take the plunge. School would always
be there, so if it didn’t work out for me, I could easily go back and finish my degree. It’s not unusual to graduate from college at 30; but it’s
a lot less likely to break into acting at that age. In my heart, I thought
it was the best decision for me at the time.
With school on hold, I picked up more shifts at Hooters and eventually started working part time as a Hawaiian Tropic model. The gig
basically required me to show up at events in company apparel or


appear in movie bit roles in swimwear and a “Miss Hawaiian Tropic”
pageant sash. I thought it would be a great way to make extra money
and also to meet people. In Hollywood, you never knew where opportunities would arise. I would end up being right, of course. The gig
would lead to something, though maybe not what I had expected.
Not long after, at a Hawaiian Tropic Bikini Contest in Beverly
Hills, one of the event organizers pointed out an older man.
“You see that guy over there?” he asked. “That’s Hugh Hefner’s
personal physician.” Naturally, it was exciting that someone associated
was Playboy was at the event, but I didn’t give it too much consideration until an hour later when the man approached me.
“Would you be interested in attending a party at the Playboy
Mansion?” he said, barely taking the time to meet my eyes. My mouth
fell to the floor. He posed the remark as a question, but it was clear he
already knew there was only one answer.
He’d apparently been at the party offering invitations to the girls
he deemed Playboy-party worthy. It wasn’t abnormal for a representative from the magazine or one of Hef’s friends to invite attractive women to the parties. Many of my coworkers had become regulars at the
mansion. I guess I just wasn’t expecting an invitation of my own, and
especially not from his doctor of all people.
Was he really asking me if I want to go to the Playboy Mansion?
I thought. For a starstruck girl from Oregon, this felt like the chance of
a lifetime.
“Are you kidding?” I squealed. “Of course!”
In Los Angeles in 2000, there was only one invitation that
mattered: a Playboy party. Nowadays, invitations to the Playboy Mansion are sold to the highest bidders and to any media outlet offering
any morsel of publicity. It’s no longer considered exclusive or coveted.
But back then? It was the place to be. Hef threw only a handful of


parties each year with a maximum capacity of about 800—and the
guest list was strictly invitation only.
When I received my glossy black invitation in the mail a few days
later, I could feel my heart swell with excitement. “Hef’s Midsummer
Night’s Dream Party,” it read. On the front was a beautiful pinup illustration by famed artist Olivia De Berardinis and inside was a small
piece of paper with directions. It was like Cinderella finally scoring an
invitation to the ball—except instead of arriving by horse-drawn carriage, we would board a shuttle at a UCLA parking garage.
The dress code was strict: “Sleepwear Required.” My coworker
Heather had also landed an invitation—a huge coup for me considering invitees weren’t allowed a “plus one”—so we immediately starting
obsessing over what we would wear.
Despite having very little flexible income, I decided I needed a
new lingerie set from Frederick’s of Hollywood: a black satin corset
with matching garter belts, thigh-high stockings, and a short yet conservative silk robe to wear on top of the ensemble. Bikinis and Hooters
shorts aside, it would be a little while before I would be comfortable
parading around in “lingerie or less,” the staple look at a Playboy
party.
ONE BY ONE, GUESTS stepped off the shuttle. Every inch of the estate
seemed to sparkle. Bright white twinkle lights lit the walkway towards
the decadent soiree; gorgeous colored spotlights draped the cascading
waterfalls framing the pool. Both Heather and I were so overwhelmed
we barely spoke a word to each other as we took in the magnificent
grounds. Before we entered the party, a staffer asked to take our photograph. We didn’t even question why as one by one each woman


stood for a Polaroid. When we finally made our way around to the
backyard, we spotted the most lavish buffet of food I had ever seen.
For two broke waitresses who existed mainly on Top Ramen and
chicken wings, it was a feast fit for royalty: seafood bars, carving stations, sushi buffets, dessert carts, and gorgeous-looking drinks flowing
from the flagstone bar next to the pool.
Suddenly Heather jerked my arm and pointed across the lawn.
“Oh my god, there’s Cameron Diaz,” she said, pointing to the tall
beautiful blonde sitting at a table nearby. And next to her was Jim Carrey. Across the pool, Heather spotted Leonardo DiCaprio! It was a virtual who’s who of Hollywood!
“Holly! Heather!” We heard our names through the crowd. Who
could we possibly know here?
It was a welcome relief to see our friend Kira, another Hooters
server, waving to us from across the party. She navigated her way
through the sea of people with the expertise of someone accustomed to
these types of events. Working together, I knew that Kira had seen her
fair share of Playboy parties.
“You guys want a tour?” She posed the question as if we had just
happened into her very own living room, and we immediately took her
up on the offer. She walked us through the infamous candlelit grotto
(which was still empty at this early hour), through the zoo where we
fed grapes to the tiny monkeys, and inside the ’70s-themed game
house before making our way into the main event. Gorgeous colorful
fabrics clung to every corner of the grand tent rooftop, while faux grass
lined the bottom, creating the illusion of some fantastical forest (although I’m quite certain that many of the people in attendance didn’t
make a habit of reading Shakespeare, and, in some cases, quite possibly had never even heard of the play the party was named for).
Everything looked so sensuous and inviting.


It wasn’t until we were tucked away in a corner of the tent that I
finally spotted our infamous host looking quite gloomy—especially for
a man flanked by two of the most breathtaking beauties I had ever
seen. The Bentley twins were tall, tan, and reed thin with slow, languorous walks. They conducted themselves like royalty—as if they
were on the arm of a king or a president—but were dressed like sex kittens in custom-tailored Baracci costumes. Shimmering with beads, sequins, and Swarovski crystals on French lace skirts and tops, their outfits were unlike anything any other partygoer was wearing. They were
sexy but oh so elegant, with perfectly painted faces and blond cascading curls decorated with glittery butterflies. They were picture perfect
and, needless to say, made a lasting impression.
“He never stays for that long,” Kira said, when she saw me looking
over at Hef and his fabulous girlfriends. I watched as Hef sat in a
crowded corner of the tent, shaking hands with one partygoer after another. My first thought was that he appeared really out of it. Was he
senile? I thought. More likely, he was just bored. After 50 years of
glad-handing, I’d imagine you’d get sick of it, too.
I knew I didn’t have long before he made his escape, so Heather
and I headed towards his table to introduce ourselves. Maybe Mr.
Playboy would see me, think I was pretty, and suggest I audition for a
pictorial. It was a long shot, but I figured it couldn’t hurt. Stranger
things could happen.
“Hi, I’m Holly,” I said, sticking out my hands to meet his.
“What’s that?” he asked, clearly having trouble hearing over the
crowd.
“I’m Holly,” I repeated, a little louder.
“Oh, hi. Nice to meet you, darling,” Hef said before turning his attention to the next person. There were no fireworks, no “Rhapsody in
Blue,” and there certainly wasn’t any audition.


Oh well, I thought, I gave it a shot.

CHAPTER 2

In another moment down went Alice after it, never
once considering how in the world she was to get
out again.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

A

year after my first Playboy Mansion invite, I had become
something of a fixture at the infamous Sunday “Fun in the Sun” pool
parties. After that fateful Midsummer Night’s Dream party, Heather
and I started getting invited back to the mansion regularly. What
wasn’t to love? Bikinis, drinks, food, music, and friends. And without
fail, the sun was always shining on Hef’s little corner of heaven. He
wouldn’t have had it any other way.
Without the massive tents and fake grass that the staff sprawled
out for the Midsummer Night’s Dream soirees, you could really appreciate the true beauty of the property: lush landscaping, rolling green
hills, and exotic birds that roamed freely throughout the grounds. It
was unlike anything I had ever seen before—it was truly an oasis in the
middle of Los Angeles and a life so unlike my own that I almost envied
the women that were able to call this magical place home.


Of those women, the glamorous Bentley twins had already exited
the mansion by this time, leaving an opening for a new crop of blondes
to emerge—most of whom also wound up being published in the
magazine as Playmates in rapid succession. In the Playboy culture, it’s
considered an honor to be chosen as the magazine’s Playmate of the
Month (the large pictorial includes a poster folded in the center of the
issue, hence the name “centerfold”). An even bigger honor was to be
chosen as the magazine’s Playmate of the Year. Every June, a winning
Playmate is selected from the previous year’s 12 candidates and is
awarded $100,000, a new car, a new pictorial, and a cover. Most girls
who rotated through the Playboy revolving door prayed that they
might eventually be chosen as a Playmate so that their names would
be in contention when it came time to choose the Playmate of the Year.
Hef’s new girlfriends weren’t all necessarily Playmates, but they
definitely all aspired to be. In fact, to an outsider, it could easily be
misconstrued that the only way a blonde was eligible to be featured in
the magazine was to date its editor-in-chief. Month after month, they
appeared: Brande Roderick, Buffy Tyler, Katie Lohmann, Kimberly
Stanfield . . . Tina Jordan and three of Hef’s other girlfriends were in
the process of shooting soon-to-be-published Playmate pictorials as
well.
Hundreds of women were invited to each mansion party, so of
course not all of them could be Playmates. Some of the Playmate hopefuls unable to land one of those 12 coveted spots modeled for less prestigious “minor pictorials” in Playboy or for pictorials on Playboy.com.
The guest list for the Sunday pool parties was much more selective, so I have to admit, I was flattered to have been included. Only 20
or so girls were invited to these more intimate events splashing the
day away. Yet it was rare to see any of Hef’s then seven girlfriends at
the pool party for any length of time. I remember it striking me as odd


that they chose to hole away in their mansion bedrooms, but I didn’t
give it much thought beyond that. (I would later realize that they considered it dues they no longer needed to pay.) As for Hef, he would
tuck away in a corner of the pool and play backgammon with two
friends—usually the only other males allowed to be in attendance. Occasionally they would stride over and join the girls in a drink or a
game, but they mostly kept to themselves and always focused their attention on Hef. After all, they wanted a repeat invite and Hef, without
actually saying a word, made it clear that the girls were solely for his
amusement. The staffers—who strictly refused all tips—were readily
available to wait on us hand and foot, the mansion gym was available
to any of the girls who wanted to work out during the party (perhaps a
red flag to the expectations placed on the women of Playboy), and a
masseuse was on call in the bathhouse for guests looking to further
unwind.
One afternoon I was freshening up in the bathhouse and talking
with a girlfriend when a buxom woman named Nicole bounded in and
introduced herself. She was very sweet, but I could barely stop gaping
long enough to get a word out. This woman had the largest breasts I’d
ever seen, so large that it looked like the implants were struggling to
escape from under her skin. The masseuse had to go rustle up an extra
stack of towels just so Nicole could lie on her stomach for the treatment. (Years later, I was flipping through an issue of Playboy and recognized the busty blonde from the bathhouse—only this time her
name was Coco and she was married to the rapper Ice-T. It’s been her
booty that has earned her the most attention, but strangely enough I
didn’t notice her butt as unusually large back then. Probably because I
couldn’t take my eyes off of those boobs!)
When the light would eventually dip below the hills in yet another
picture perfect sunset, the service staff would busy themselves with


preparations for the evening’s dinner and movie screening. The pool
party guests would excuse themselves to freshen up as the festivities
moved inside. Eventually, some of the girlfriends would trickle down
from upstairs and idly take their obligatory seat next to Hef at the dining table for the pre-movie buffet. I could never understand their lack
of enthusiasm; they seemed to have it all. Initially, I assumed they
were spoiled, jaded, or just not a good fit in Hef’s world—maybe they
hated the social scene or hated watching old movies every week. Since
those were things I happened to love, I couldn’t understand it.
Because I was an L.A. transplant, the concept of “being fake” was
still a bit lost on me. Don’t get me wrong; I was familiar with fake tans,
fake nails, and of course fake boobs, having already undergone my
breast enhancement surgery. But I didn’t have any idea how insincere
and calculated people could be. It never dawned on me that the girls I
was about to be spending a lot of time with had ulterior motives beyond simply being friendly, and that all of their encouragement was just
for show. As I’d come to learn, they saw me as a useful pawn in their
twisted game of Playboy chess.
In those early days, Vicky and Lisa (two of Hef’s live-in girlfriends) were incredibly welcoming—the other girlfriends weren’t particularly mean, but they didn’t exactly roll out the red carpet, either. I
knew that the role of girlfriend was coveted by many and fleeting for
some, so I expected the women to be defensive, protective, and, quite
frankly, bitchy—especially this crop of girls who looked more like
garden variety strippers than dazzling Playboy bunnies. I was surprised with how wrong I thought I was. They were accepting and encouraging—some more than others—and Vicky, one of the more
seasoned girlfriends, even offered to take me under her wing as I navigated this new, foreign world. It really didn’t occur to me that they
had their own agenda, which I would soon learn.


The girls would rattle on about how glamorous it was being a
“girlfriend” and how every girl that moved into the mansion would
eventually become a Playmate; they all had a weekly allowance to buy
club clothes and get their hair and nails done; and the afternoons free
to spend however they like. As a girlfriend, you just needed to be available on the nights when Hef hosted events at the mansion, went clubbing in Hollywood, attended red carpet parties, etc.
This may sound naïve, but I didn’t immediately realize that they
were actually required to sleep with Hef. Back then, none of the girlfriends talked about it. When I inquired about the more intimate duties, Vicky fiercely denied that anything sexual went on with Hef.
“It’s all for show,” Vicky said, explaining that the whole thing was
basically a Hef-orchestrated publicity stunt.
The girlfriends were simply dazzling arm candy to help keep up
his Playboy image. It sounded more like a job than an actual relationship—and they sold it to me so matter-of-factly I was able to overlook
what this “job” really sounded like. Hef’s former girlfriend Katie
Lohmann had recently left, and Vicky told me that when she went on
Howard Stern after scoring her centerfold and cheerfully denied that
any of the girls slept with Hef with a dismissive laugh, she was
promptly kicked out of the mansion. (Years later I found a taped copy
of the interview in Hef’s press collection with a skull drawn on the label. He must have really hated that one!)
I would be lying if I said I still didn’t have dreams of one day scoring a pictorial in Playboy’s iconic pages, and mansion parties were a
fun way to spend the weekend, but my main focus was either pursuing
an acting career or going back to school. I didn’t have time to be Hugh
Hefner’s on-call trophy girlfriend seven days a week, nor did I really
think I had what it took. When I first started coming around, Hef was
dating the Bentley twins—those two sophisticated glamazons that


seemed to pay homage to the glory days of Playboy. With the right
hair and makeup, I considered myself a pretty girl, but Mandy and
Sandy looked like movie stars. After they departed the mansion, the
“Sloppy Seven” invaded and lowered the bar.
It’s almost unsettling how quickly your priorities can shift.
Over the past year, I had been working long hours to afford my
rent and I’d been auditioning like crazy. Luckily, I had no trouble getting an agent—and even managed to land a few bit parts here and
there. They didn’t pay much, but it was enough to encourage me to
continue pursuing my dream. My two closest friends hadn’t been as
fortunate. Heather had given up and decided she was moving back to
Pittsburgh. My roommate Nora hadn’t landed a single thing, either.
The lease on our apartment was ending and she told me that her parents had agreed to pay her rent on a new lease—but only if she had her
brother (an alcoholic who needed constant babysitting) move in. Just
like that, I had to go.
It was like that scene in Bridesmaids where Kristen Wiig gets
booted from her apartment by Rebel Wilson and her on-screen brother—only not funny. Nora knew I had no credit and was broke as a joke;
I couldn’t believe she was doing this to me. But as hopeless as the situation seemed, I refused to go back to Oregon. Not only did I not want
to burden my parents, I also knew that leaving now would set back any
progress I had made in becoming an actress. The desire to perform is
what drove me to Los Angeles, and the thought of returning home
miserable and still dreaming of Hollywood killed me.
I started to wonder, Couldn’t Playboy help me reach that goal?
I’d seen it before: Baywatch Hawaii executive producer Michael Berk
was a mansion regular and Hef’s former girlfriend Brande Roderick
landed a leading role on the show shortly after appearing as a centerfold. The more time I spent at that enchanting Holmby Hills


compound, the more I started seeing opportunities like these. It’s very
easy to get transfixed by the magic of this curious world where even
the impossible seemed possible—where a small-town girl could rub elbows with movie stars and be made to feel like a fantasy. I had spent
so much of my youth searching for that kind of opportunity and it
seemed Playboy could hand it to me on a silver bunny emblazoned
platter. One weekend while waiting outside of the mansion’s front
door for the valet to pull up my beat-up old car at the end of a “Sunday
Funday,” I looked up at the glowing second-story windows and
wondered what it would feel like to call that place home. It looked so
cozy and safe.
Vicky had once given me a peek inside her room—and I was surprised at how much it looked like the type of room I would have liked
to have. The plush bed was covered in pink candy-striped satin sheets
and piled high with Playboy-branded clothing—free gifts for Hef’s girlfriends. Disney paraphernalia was everywhere from a recent shopping
spree at Disneyland—all on Hef’s tab, of course. And a dreamy windowseat overlooked the backyard.
We even ordered cheeseburgers from the kitchen, which may not
sound like much, but it was. Once upon a time, Hef’s guests could order whatever they wanted from the kitchen, whenever they wanted. It
was even said that Jack Nicholson used to treat the mansion as a
drive-thru back in the ’70s. He would call the butler’s pantry ahead of
time, order a meal, and have it brought out to his car as he drove up
the driveway. After the food was delivered to him in a paper sack, he
would supposedly speed out the back gate without so much as a hello.
Since then, guests’ access to the kitchen became a little more limited,
but Hef’s girlfriends could still order whatever they wanted, 24 hours a
day. To me, someone used to scraping together pennies in order to eat
at Burger King, this was on another level!


I had to admit: the whole girlfriend thing was starting to look
pretty appealing.
Around that time, a few of the girls had suggested that I come out
with them for one of the biweekly club nights. One of the girlfriends,
Kimberly, had recently been kicked out, which meant there was an
open spot Hef was ready to fill. “Talk to Hef,” Vicky encouraged after I
confided in her about my housing problems. Never did it occur to me
to simply approach him myself. It also never occurred to me that the
then-seven girlfriends wanted me around only because my “ordinary”
appearance was nonthreatening. They wanted to make sure whoever
filled the empty space wasn’t competition.
On Sunday, I worked up the nerve to mention the idea to Hef
when he finally appeared poolside. “I’d love to come along with you
the next time you all go out,” I said, bracing myself for a less than exuberant response. Much to my surprise, he immediately took to the
idea and invited me to join them that coming Wednesday.
“Awesome,” I cheered, with a little hop. “Thank you!” Hef seemed
amused by my childlike excitement, but quickly turned back to his
friends.
When I found Vicky to share the good news, she filled me in on all
of the details: I was to meet Hef and the girls at 10 P.M. in the mansion’s main entry hall dressed to impress in my sexiest club wear before heading to Las Palmas—Hollywood’s hottest nightclub.
Every girl at some point has uttered the phrase, “I have nothing to
wear.” But in my case, it was sort of true. I spent the next three days
staring at the approximately 10 items of clothing hanging in my closet
wishing that something appropriate would magically appear. I figured
that if Hef approved of how I looked, maybe he would consider offering me a role as a “girlfriend.” It felt like a long shot, but there was always a chance. And my alternate options were becoming more and


more grim. I would not be going back to Oregon. I just couldn’t! Still, I
was too embarrassed to ask any of my friends to borrow anything—probably because doing so meant I would have to field questions I wasn’t prepared to answer.
Eventually, I decided to pair a black miniskirt (which, despite its
name, was about three inches longer than anything any of the girlfriends wore) and a baby blue top with metal mesh overlay that tied in
the back. After analyzing my every angle in the bathroom mirror, I
took a deep breath, jumped in my car, and made the 10-minute drive
to Hugh Hefner’s place. I pulled into the driveway at 9:55 P.M. petrified that I would be the last to arrive—I’ve always been a stickler for
punctuality. I quickly discovered that was a rarity at the mansion. I
waited in the entrance hall for more than 10 minutes before any of the
ladies made their way down the cascading old English staircase. There
was another girl waiting downstairs named Candice who appeared to
be “auditioning” for the open girlfriend spot as well. She was quick to
tell me that she had already been out with the group the previous Friday and also how fond Hef was of her.
Oh shit, I thought, maybe I was a day late and a dollar short.
Candice might get offered the empty girlfriend spot before me.
In passing, the mansion looks decadent, but when taking the time
to truly look at some of the nooks and crannies, it’s amazing how neglected it was. I would come to refer to the décor as “ ’70s porn chic.” At
the time, there were nine dogs living in the mansion (most of them
named after fashion designers or luxury car brands, naturally), and
the ancient yellow carpeting on the grand staircase was covered in urine stains. I remember thinking that the carpet must have been older
than any of his girlfriends. That being said, at the time, it was by far
the nicest home I’d ever stepped inside.


Finally, the girlfriends emerged in ascending order: newest to the
oldest. At that particular time, the cast of characters was a motley crew
of bottle blondes: a quiet girl named Carolyn, upcoming Playmates
April, Adrianna, and Lisa; Vicky; and Tina Jordan (Hef’s “main girlfriend”). The scene was almost comical as each girl bounced down the
Gone With the Wind–esque staircase like a carbon copy of the girl before her: white-ish blond hair in large barrel curls, the skimpiest
sparkly dress imaginable, and the kind of strappy platform heels you’d
expect to see on stage at a strip club. I would have thought Hugh Hefner preferred his girlfriends sexy and retro, but his taste was surprisingly . . . well, cheap. As for Tina and Hef, they would never arrive until everyone was already in place—like some antiquated nod to the
hierarchy that existed.
One of the butlers arranged us in the hall and snapped a few pictures for Hef’s scrapbook before we piled into the limousine—another
Playboy tradition to satisfy Hef’s endless desire for mementos (the
next morning prints would be placed outside each girl’s bedroom door,
which only amplified the massive pressure to always look perfect and
caused the girlfriends to spend hours critiquing their appearances).
When we finally arrived in Hollywood, the scene outside of the
nightclub was absolute chaos. Hundreds of men in Von Dutch trucker
hats and women in their obligatory low-rise Frankie B. jeans and fedoras (because in 2001 every club girl was just dying to be mistaken
for Britney Spears) were bombarding the entryway, clamoring over
one another to get the attention of the resident doormen stationed behind the red velvet rope. From the looks of it, you would have thought
Oprah was inside giving away free cars. As the limo door opened, four
security guards rushed to part the sea of club-goers so we could make
our way inside. I had been to nightclubs before, but I was usually one
of those unlucky souls not “on the list” and relegated to the milelong


line that wrapped around the block. I was one of the first to step out of
the limo and every set of eyes turned to check if I was someone worth
knowing. I started fussing with my top, unnerved by this unexpected
attention. One by one, each bottle blonde piled out of the limousine—waiting for Hef before we made our way inside. Vicky must
have noticed the astonishment in my eyes because she leaned over and
whispered, “ ’NSYNC and Christina Aguilera were here the last time
we came.”
When Hef finally emerged from the car, the crowd went wild.
People were shouting his name and shoving one another to get a better
look. He lifted a hand to wave to the crowd as if he were some kind of
dignitary. The whole thing seemed incredibly strange to me, but for
Hef it had become a regular part of his weekly routine on the L.A. club
scene. For decades, Hef was an infamous homebody. After all, he created his own version of paradise at the Playboy Mansion, so why
would he ever want to leave? Throughout the ’70s, ’80s, and ’90s, it
was extremely rare to see him out and about. In 1999, when he separated from his wife of almost 10 years, Kimberley Conrad, a few of his
friends persuaded him to leave his compound for a night on the town.
What happened next was a surprise to everyone. People went absolutely crazy to see this 70-something icon from another era at an L.A.
nightclub. Shortly thereafter Hef instituted his biweekly club nights.
Rolling Stone magazine called it “Hugh Hefner’s Resurrection.” (I
would later learn that this sort of behavior wasn’t atypical. The only
thing Hef loved more than the mansion was himself. The sort of super
fandom he saw at these nightclubs was all the fuel this senior citizen
needed to keep painting the town red.)
It was during one such evening, after his separation, that Hef met
Sandy and Mandy Bentley. Immediately he began dating these two
blond bombshells, along with another blonde, Brande Roderick. This


unusual foursome made Hef even more of a sensation. The age difference, the number of girlfriends, the hint of incest, the fact that all
three of the girls’ names rhymed, along with Hef’s constant public insistence that he had to take Viagra to keep up with all of these women
made the situation truly bizarre. In Los Angeles the bizarre is often appreciated, if only momentarily, and at that moment in time Hef and
his blond entourage had become adored mascots of the L.A. nightclub
world.
As soon as we entered past the velvet ropes we were whisked away
to a private area next to the dance floor. Hef settled into the plush
booth flanked by Tina and Lisa. Our VIP table was already stocked
with an array of alcohol and mixers—this was the golden age of bottle
service and Hef indulged in every luxury. Security lined the velvet
ropes separating our table from the rest of the crowd. If a guy was
brazen enough to try to get the attention of one of the girlfriends, security would block them from our table—and occasionally escort them
outside, depending on how persistent he was. Since most nights the
girls were locked up in the mansion like some twisted version of Rapunzel, they used these evenings out as opportunities to meet other
men.
Yes, most of Hugh Hefner’s girlfriends had other boyfriends. In
fact, during my time at the mansion, I can only say for sure that two of
us remained faithful (my future BFF Bridget Marquardt and myself).
Needless to say, this was all very hush-hush, because Hef strictly forbade any of his girlfriends from dating other people. While Hef could
date an entire sorority house full of girls, we were to remain totally
loyal. Looking back, I’m pretty sure that rule existed not so much because Hef was jealous of other men, but because the truth would have
burst the public persona he had spent decades crafting. Girls who were
caught “cheating” on Hef would be thrown out of the house


immediately. While the girls took that rule extremely seriously, it
didn’t mean they would actually obey it. So, on these club nights, the
girls would dip off “to the ladies’ room” and head to a corner of the bar
hidden from Hef’s view, making “friends” and exchanging numbers
with men . . . like normal 20-something girls should be doing.
I stayed close to Vicky most of that night and followed her lead:
dancing, drinking, and making sure to pay lots of attention to Hef. At
one point when he stood up to dance with us, his rhythm was so off
that I was certain he was joking and let out a big laugh. Vicky shot me
a look that made it very clear: he was not joking. Luckily, he didn’t register my laugh as mocking and continued dancing.
Oh my god, I thought, genuinely mortified for him. Had no one
told him how silly he looked? He pulled out some truly ancient dance
moves that I can’t imagine were remotely cool in any era other than
the ’70s. I felt a bit sorry for him dancing around like the punch line to
a bad joke. Did they always allow him to look so foolish? I wondered
why these women, his seven dingbats, didn’t care enough to protect
him from the embarrassment—surely they owed him at least that. And
worse yet, they encouraged his awkward dancing about. Back then, he
seemed like such a sweet man to me and this felt unnecessarily cruel.
Regardless, I knew it wasn’t my place to break the news to him—not
that night anyway. I was so eager to make a good impression that I
could hear my heart in my ears. I was grateful that Hef allowed me to
tag along in the first place. He seemed like a good man and talked as if
he wanted the world for his girls.
But like all that glitters and sparkles, this opportunity wouldn’t
come without a steep price.
“Would you like a Quaalude?” Hef asked, leaning towards me with
a bunch of large horse pills in his hands, held together by a crumpled
tissue.


“No thanks,” I answered cheerfully, as if I were interviewing for a
job. “I don’t do drugs.”
“Okay, that’s good,” he said nonchalantly. “Usually I don’t approve of drugs, but you know, in the ’70s they used to call these pills
‘thigh openers.’ ”
I laughed nervously—unsure of what to say. I was proud of myself
for saying no; it was the right decision. I still felt in control of the situation and was prepared to tackle whatever came my way with sober
eyes.
Today, I want to scream “PAUSE!” and freeze frame that moment
of my life back in late August 2001. I want to grab that young girl,
shake her back into reality, and scream, “What the hell are you
thinking?”
Hef was a notoriously lecherous 70-something old man offering
me Quaaludes that he referred to as “thigh openers.” Are you kidding
me? Why didn’t I run for the nearest exit? It doesn’t get much creepier
than that.
But I suppose I had already made up my mind at that point. Looking back, I can’t imagine what I was thinking, but I’m also so far removed from what I was feeling back then. I was about to be homeless.
I had no place to go and was panicking over what to do next when this
opportunity with Hef just sort of fell into my lap. If I became a girlfriend, I would have somewhere to live. If I became part of Playboy’s
inner circle, perhaps that could even help my career. It felt as if my
stars were starting to align. I decided to take the chance and see what
this strange, legendary world was all about. For as long as I could remember, I had been searching for a great adventure, and this was
already the craziest night I’d ever experienced. Like watching a bizarre
old movie, I was utterly transfixed by this strange universe.


Despite my initial intention to keep a clear head, I foolishly proceeded to get really, really drunk without even meaning to. I can’t even
begin to tell you how much vodka and champagne I consumed—aided
by the helpful hands of the other girls, who were all too eager to continue plying me with drinks. While I patted myself on the back for
turning down the pills, by the time we left the club, I couldn’t have
been any more incoherent.
On the limo ride back to the mansion, Candice leaned over and
whispered to me that all of the girls, myself included, were expected to
join Hef in his bedroom. She had a small smile on her face as she
watched me absorb this news, which I immediately registered as odd
. . . almost as if she relished my shock. For the better part of the year,
the girlfriends went out of their way to convince me that no one was
actually intimate with Hef. Was Candice just trying to scare me off?
I wasn’t an idiot. Despite their staunch denials, it was still a
widely accepted public theory that Hef slept with all of his girlfriends.
But when I asked them about it directly, they were incredibly convincing, acting almost appalled by the idea. This important factor was the
touchstone of their entire sales pitch, and the fact that sex would actually be required wasn’t exactly something I had prepared myself
for—especially for my first night out. But at that point, I felt like it was
my only option.
Maybe it wasn’t that torturous, I thought. Why else would all
these pretty young girls be jumping through hoops to be girlfriends?
I could just see what it’s all about. If it’s that bad, I’ll leave.
What happened next is all sort of a haze. With roughly a third of a
bottle of vodka sloshing around my stomach, I stumbled up the mansion’s grand staircase and was ushered by the girls towards Hugh Hefner’s bedroom suite. Tina brought me into the back door of the bedroom, which led into the large black and yellow bathroom. All the


girlfriends—in various stages of undress—conglomerated around the
large black marble bathtub with their feet dangling in the pool of hot
water. I followed Tina’s lead, took off my shoes, and dipped my feet in.
I have to say, after a full night of dancing (in very high heels!), the hot
water felt amazing.
Before I even had a chance to register much of what was going on,
the girls quickly got up and hightailed it into the dark, cavernous room
beyond. (They all hated the bedroom routine and tried to get it over
with as quickly as possible.) Tina handed me a pink flannel pajama set
to wear, which matched the ones all the other girls were grabbing out
of Hef’s massive closet area. (Yes, Hef’s harem wore flannel pj’s. How’s
that for a fantasy?)
As Tina led me into the bedroom, I stumbled over and weaved
through massive piles of junk covering the floor. It appeared that Hef
liked to collect more than just women. Ceiling-high piles of videotapes,
stuffed animals, art, and gifts littered the room. It was like an episode
of Hoarders. But perhaps in his case it would be more appropriately
titled Whore-ders.
Two huge television screens projecting graphic porn lit up the
otherwise dark bedroom. In the middle, a very pale man was tending
to his own business (if you’re catching my thinly veiled innuendo) and
puffing on a joint before passing it around to the nearest blonde. The
girlfriends, in various stages of undress, were sitting in a semicircle at
the edge of the bed—some kneeling, some standing, and some lying
down.
I sat myself on the edge of the bed—unsure of what to do next. I
leaned into Vicky—after all, she was the one I was most comfortable
with.
Maybe if I hide behind her, I thought, I’ll go unnoticed for the
night.


“Fake the fuck!” she hissed in my ear and pulled me towards her.
“I’ll explain later!”
She didn’t have to explain. My eyes had adjusted to the darkness
and I could see that all the girls, backlit by the large screens, were putting on a show: they were going through the motions as if they were
getting it on or making out with each other, but no one really was. It
was just a big façade. No one was actually in the mood (besides Hef, I
assumed) or turned on in the slightest. Like the porn itself, it was all
just for show. There was loud music blaring, but if you got close
enough to any of the girls, you could hear them gossiping with one another or making fun of what was going on in front of them. If smartphones had been around then, I’m pretty sure they would have been
texting or checking their Instagram when Hef wasn’t looking.
When I think about it now, it’s almost comical. Every red-blooded
American male has no doubt fantasized about what went on in Hugh
Hefner’s bedroom with his harem of blond bombshells. The answer?
Not a whole lot.
Looking back, I don’t know if Hef believed the charade. Truthfully, I don’t think he cared one way or the other. Whether it was real
or fake, he would be satisfied in knowing that the only reason it was
happening at all was for his own personal pleasure.
The girlfriends, and Vicky, it seemed to me in particular, were
desperate to bring as many new girls up into the bedroom as possible.
With more “fresh meat” available for Hef, it was less likely that they’d
be called on to have sex with their “boyfriend” as often. Hef could keep
up with only so many girls in a night, so, as I saw it, Vicky had quickly
figured out that recruiting new girls effectively achieved two goals at
once: not only would she most likely avoid having to have sex with
Hef, but she’d also earn his favor by bringing around pretty new young
things for his enjoyment. Of course at the time, I knew none of this.


Despite the bimbo label often placed on Hef’s harem, some of these
girls were quite savvy. Girlfriend politics was serious business: ruthless, calculated, and complex. On that particular night, Candice and I
were the newest victims—and it definitely felt to me that our new
“friend” pushed us into the action.
“Heeeef . . . don’t you want to be with the new girl?” Vicky
screamed over the loud music as she reached over and pushed him towards me.
Much to my surprise, my turn was over just as quickly as it started. By the time I was able to wrap my head around what was happening, Hef had already moved on to Candice, then to a few of his actual
girlfriends before finishing off by himself, as he always did. I have never had a more disconnected experience. There was zero intimacy involved. No kissing, nothing. It was so brief that I can’t even recall what
it felt like beyond having a heavy body on top of mine.
Even though it was just a few short minutes of my life, I had never
taken intimate experiences lightly, so it weighed heavily on me. I was
disappointed in myself that it had come to this. Even in my drunken
haze, I knew that it was a big decision I would have to live with.
Some of the girls leaned over and quickly pecked Hef on the
cheek—in the same unattached manner that most would probably kiss
their grandfather. The girls began filing out of the room, offering Hef a
few candy-coated “good nights.” Quickly, I pulled on my pajamas and
followed Vicky down the hall and into her bedroom. I was so wasted
that I forgot to grab my club clothes and purse—which were strewn
about somewhere on the floor of the master suite. Vicky ordered
cheeseburgers and fries to the room as if it were any other night, but I
passed out before the food even arrived.
Over the years, I would see so many girls come and go through
that cavernous master bedroom. I never encouraged anyone to come


up there and was often downright cold to some of the girls Hef would
invite out with us. It wasn’t because I felt threatened or even due to my
own embarrassment, but mostly because I didn’t want to do to those
girls what Vicky had done to me. I had hoped my hard exterior would
dissuade them from making my same mistakes. Vicky had tried to act
all buddy-buddy, like we were just friends having fun together, like she
wanted me to be a part of her club, but I had been used: plain and
simple. Unfortunately, it took me a while to realize that. At the time, I
wanted to believe that Vicky actually liked me, and only pushed Hef
towards me because she wanted me to become a girlfriend. Like I said
in the beginning, I was naïve.
THE FOLLOWING MORNING, I woke up feeling terrible—and it wasn’t just
the hangover. Vicky escorted me back to the master bedroom to help
me look for my clothes and purse. And just as if it were any other
morning, she gave me a friendly hug good-bye.
But I couldn’t just leave. I had to find Hef.
After asking one of the butlers where he might be, I finally found
him in the library busying himself with notes for that Friday night’s
mansion movie screening (before each movie he always prepared a
sort of speech).
“Hef, can I bother you for a second?” I squeaked, my voice breaking midsentence (I would quickly adopt this as my “go-to” pitch when
speaking with Hef—the higher octave made it easier for him to hear
out of his one good ear). Without even looking up from the pages, he
gestured with one hand that I enter his lair. In light of the evening prior, I was even more nervous in his presence than usual. Hef was so
used to girls coming in to ask for favors, though, that he didn’t seem at
all surprised by my impromptu interruption. I had gone from hoping


to move into the mansion to downright determined. There was no way
I was not going to get what I wanted after having to sleep with him the
night before (or, rather, earlier that morning).
In the years that would follow, I noticed that after being intimate
with Hef, the new girls fell into one of three categories: the hustler, the
runner, or the fighter.
Most of the girls that ended up becoming girlfriends reacted the
same way: they were very nonchalant about their “initiation.” Before
the sun even rose the following morning, these hustlers were already
calculating just how many pennies they could squeeze out of the
arrangement.
Next, we had the runners. While the hustlers were scheming, the
runners were fleeing. Like a hit-and-run, these girls would bolt from
the scene, never to be heard from again. While most—if not all—had
hoped to land a pictorial, they disappeared off the face of the planet,
never returning for another night out or party, despite being invited
back. The “runners” always seemed like inexperienced girls, so I assumed they didn’t come back because they didn’t like what they had
seen or done in Hef’s bedroom while under the influence of alcohol,
Quaaludes, or both.
My reaction fell into the third category: the fighters. I was freaked
out and, frankly, ashamed by the experience. After disappointing myself like that, I had to come away with something positive, something
to make it right in my mind, somehow. I knew that if I couldn’t find a
silver lining, I couldn’t forgive myself for the night before. The other
girls who would react as I did were probably the most damaged and affected—we couldn’t so easily shrug off what we had been reduced to. It
would haunt us, but in order to move forward we needed to find an
upside.


For me, asking to move in therefore seemed like the next rational
step—or so I convinced myself—and I decided to bite the bullet. After
all, it hadn’t occurred to me to invite myself out to a club night until
prompted—and I had met a very welcoming response—so I figured I
might have the same luck with moving in. I was a young blond girl
with a small waist and large boobs, but I wasn’t quite as polished as
the girls that usually decorated Playboy’s pages—and hallways. Still,
for the most part, I fit the bill of “girlfriend.”
I can do this, I thought.
It might be hard to understand, but in that moment, I didn’t
blame Hef for anything creepy that had gone on the night before. He
had the “nice guy” act down pat and it worked. At the time, Hef still
had a certain swagger. There was a gentlemanly air about him that belied his reputation. And there was never a shortage of Hef’s friends
lingering around the mansion who were all too eager to remind every
pretty young thing that stepped through the doorway what an amazing, kind man Hugh Hefner is. It was easy to fall under the spell. If
anything, it was the other girls I felt used by, and I couldn’t let them
win.
“Can I ask you something?” I let out another squeak. He looked
up at me for the first time and I flat-out told him that I had no place to
live. “What do you think about me moving in?”
He took a brief moment to consider what I had just asked before
finally saying, “You can stay for a while and we’ll see how it works
out.”

CHAPTER 3

“It’s really dreadful,” she muttered to herself, “the
way all the creatures argue. It’s enough to drive
one crazy!”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

I

t only took me one trip in my beat-up red Toyota Celica to move my
entire life from a tiny Westwood apartment into a Holmby Hills estate.
No one offered to move me in, but I didn’t really need the help. I didn’t
have much to bring besides the few outfits I owned, some makeup, my
college books, and a handful of childish knickknacks, like Disney Princess picture frames and Star Wars figurines. I don’t even think I
owned a curling iron at the time. I left my single twin mattress next to
a Dumpster.
As I pulled up the iconic driveway on Charing Cross Road, it
couldn’t have felt less like “home.” The gates opened for me, and just
like that, I was the newest resident of the Playboy Mansion. I pulled
my car through the driveway and gave the keys to one of the staffers,
who then made a call to one of Hef’s secretaries. She directed me to
my room and presented me with my room key.


Less than an hour later I had moved my belongings into the bedroom that Hef’s secretary designated for me, and that was that. None
of the girls even poked their heads out of their bedrooms, let alone
offered to help. I was pointed to my room and left alone. Now what? I
thought. It was entirely bizarre.
I didn’t tell many people about my decision to move into the mansion—I quickly learned that not everyone had the most positive reaction. I had naïvely thought of myself as an adult who was free to make
her own decisions, out of high school, away from small-town Oregon,
and far from the type of people who would judge me for my personal
decisions. I was so wrong.
When I told Nora I was moving into the Playboy Mansion, her jaw
dropped so quickly I thought it would hit the ground. Nora was hypermaterialistic and wasn’t expecting me to go from “rags to riches” faster
than her. In my excitement, I also told the first acquaintance I had run
into while doing errands. His reaction wasn’t what I had expected,
either.
“You hooked up with an old dude?” he cried, his face scrunching
up. “Gross!”
All I had said was that I was moving in—nothing about being intimate with anyone. I guess not everyone was as naïve as I had been.
Seeing the angry look that appeared on my face, he quickly switched
gears.
“So,” he said, his voice much friendlier, “can you get me on the list
for the parties?”
This guy clearly had no shame. Needless to say, I told him no.
After my friends’ less-than-supportive reaction, I was too terrified
to tell anyone else. I was naïve enough to believe that the decisions I
made in the relative privacy of that dark cave of a bedroom would


remain just that: private. I was by no means prepared for the large
scarlet letter that had been branded on my chest.
I knew my close friends and family wouldn’t approve, but I had
already made the decision. Listening to their words of warning and
disappointment would only make me feel worse. To be totally honest, I
was already ashamed enough and I wanted to delay any further conversations until I had a better understating of what my life would be
like.
Any remaining doubts about my decision vanished when, on an
early morning about a week after I had moved in, Vicky stormed into
my room screaming: “We’ve been bombed! We’ve been bombed!”
It was September 11, 2001.
“New York and the Pentagon,” she shrieked. “We’ve been
bombed!”
I hobbled into the bathroom feeling sick to my stomach and paralyzed with fear. I imagined that terrorists had bombs aimed at every
major city in America. Were we next? In that instant, I couldn’t have
been more grateful to be inside this great big, safe house.
Of course I soon discovered that we hadn’t actually been bombed:
but the reality was no less scary. Terrorists hijacked four American airliners and crashed two of them into the World Trade Center towers in
lower Manhattan (as well as one into the Pentagon in Washington,
D.C., and one in rural Pennsylvania).
Thank God I’m here, I thought. I would have been so much more
scared had I been out on my own, couch surfing or worse.
The first few nights I slept in Bedroom 3—one of the biggest guest
rooms in the mansion with three beds and a private bathroom, but like
all the other guest rooms in the house, relatively plain. Strangely, it
also doubled as a bedroom for Hef’s two sons Marston and Cooper
(who were 9 and 10, respectively, at the time) if they ever were to


spend the night in the mansion. Though they never stayed over while I
was there, there were still toys scattered across the bedroom
floor—which made for an incredibly odd and, frankly, creepy
juxtaposition.
April was also residing in Bedroom 3, and she intimidated the hell
out of me. She was taller and bigger boned than Hef’s usual type and
had an in-your-face personality. I had heard she used to be a stripper
even though Playboy has a somewhat hypocritical “no stripper” policy
when it comes to Hef’s idea of the wholesome Playmate image. She
also had a constant need to be the center of attention—and would do
whatever she needed to keep the spotlight on her, no matter how
raunchy. She also made zero effort to hide the fact that she felt I was
intruding on her space.
That week, another girlfriend, Adrianna, announced her departure. It was assumed that April would move into her old room (Bedroom 5) and I would be staying in the shared room. April was new to
the mansion herself, but since she had moved in several months before
me, still had seniority when it came to rooms. Bedroom 5 was one of
the smallest rooms, but it was private. And as I would quickly learn,
privacy was key when it came to surviving the mansion mayhem.
April, however, had another idea. She asked Hef if she could have
Bedroom 3 to herself. The mansion was not without its fair share of
politics, and when it came to the girlfriends, you had to put in your
time and work your way up the totem pole when it came to certain
privileges, particularly rooms. New girls who immediately began demanding certain luxuries were seen as “pushy” or “ungrateful.” Bedroom 3 was meant to house three girls; April scoring it for herself
would have been a major coup.
Surprisingly, Hef approved her request.


I moved out later that day—along with the toys. (For months to
come April complained that Marston and Cooper were hostile towards
her for taking over their room. I must say, I couldn’t really blame
them.)
April taking Bedroom 3 meant that I would be moving into Bedroom 5. I couldn’t have been more thrilled to be getting the privacy of
my own room in my very first week at the mansion. The arrangement
wasn’t without its downside, though. Bedroom 5 shared a bathroom
with Vicky’s room. Little did I know that she had a love of laxatives
that made sharing a bathroom—with thin walls—pretty disturbing.
It was standard practice for girls to redecorate their rooms when
accepting an offer to move in, but I was grateful simply to have a roof
over my head. Even if I had wanted to redecorate, I would have been
disappointed. Hef’s idea of “redecorating” a girl’s room meant replacing the carpet (which he always insisted on being white, despite all
the dogs constantly relieving themselves everywhere) and having the
walls repainted. The girl could choose the color, as long as it was one
of the chalky, matte pastel shades he favored.
All of the bedrooms contained mismatched, beat-up furniture.
Bedroom 5 had an old wooden dresser tucked into one corner, a small
TV mounted on the wall, and a bed so large that there wasn’t much
space left to move around the floor. Faded pink curtains covered the
small windows that looked out onto four parking spots next to the outdoor kitchen. There was a tiny walk-in closet that housed the few
clothing items I owned, plus a black Playboy-brand dress Adrianna
had left behind. Clearly, I had a clothing complex and was terrified
that I would quickly run out of club-appropriate attire, so finding this
little black dress was a huge relief.
But that wasn’t Adrianna’s only parting gift. She had also worked
as a Hawaiian Tropic girl and we had met on a few occasions before


she had moved in. While we were by no means close, she made it a
point to find me before she left to wish me well. When I asked her why
she was choosing to leave, she said, “I don’t really feel like it’s the right
thing for me anymore.
“I know you’re just moving in, but this place can be kind of
rough,” Adrianna went on, offering me just a bit of warning. At the
time, I wasn’t quite sure what she meant, but I later learned that since
she scored a centerfold almost immediately, the other girls were pretty
hideous to her.
My first day in Bedroom 5 was quiet and uneventful. I remember
it was a Thursday, which was the only night of the week there was
nothing planned on Hef’s agenda. When I asked Vicky if she wouldn’t
mind filling me in on the schedule, she acted as if it were some big annoyance. It’s not like anyone handed you a pamphlet when you walked
through the door and I was terrified that my “trial period” would come
to an abrupt end, so I wanted to make sure I was playing by all the
rules. I chalked it up to a bad mood, but she didn’t seem that excited to
have me as a neighbor.
After some coaxing, she finally offered me the rundown:
• Monday was “Manly Night.” Hef would have his guy friends
over for a buffet dinner and a movie in the mansion’s
screening room.
• Tuesday was “Family Night.” Hef’s wife and two sons, who
lived next door in a house Hef had purchased for them,
would come over to all spend time together.
• Wednesday and Friday were “Club Nights.” We were all expected to be ready by 10 P.M. to be shuttled off with Hef to
exclusive nightclubs all around Los Angeles.


• Thursday (like Monday and Tuesday) was an “Off Night.”
While we had the evenings free to do as we pleased, the
girlfriends were still required to be inside mansion walls by
9 P . M.
• Saturday was a buffet dinner and movie with Hef.
• Sunday was the “Fun in the Sun” pool party during the day
and dinner and a movie at night.
No one gave me a tour of the mansion when I arrived, either. I
knew my way around the grounds and most of the main house, but for
weeks I kept discovering new places on the property. There was an underground secret passage that led from the main house to the gym,
which was in the basement level of the bathhouse. The mansion itself
had a large basement, full of employee lockers, storage closets, and
laundry facilities. A panel in the wall of the living room could pop out
to reveal a secret wine cellar, which was used as a speakeasy in the
1920s when the house was built. The master bedroom had an attic
level where Hef kept a personal office, of sorts. The adjacent bathroom
truly looked like a time capsule or the land that time forgot. Gold shag
rug covered the floor. A tray of toiletries from the 1970s sat untouched
on the counter. The sink handles were carved to look like naked ladies.
There was a four-bedroom guesthouse on the grounds that hosted
Playmates and Playmate candidates when they were brought in from
out of town to shoot at Playboy Studio West in Santa Monica. I assumed the Playmate guesthouse would be plush and clean, like a hotel,
with perhaps some Playmate memorabilia strewn about to give it a
sense of atmosphere. In reality, the guesthouse could have been described as “Grandma’s attic meets rent-by-the-hour motel.” In the
’70s, Hef’s girlfriend Barbi Benton had decorated the guesthouse as a


charming early-American cottage, but over the years the theme fell
apart. What was left was dark, dingy, and depressing.
There were many rules to living in the mansion, but most of them
I had to figure out on my own. Like I said, no one handed me The
Playboy Mansion for Dummies when I arrived. I also learned that the
other girlfriends weren’t so eager to help out the newbies, since it was
in their best interest for us to stumble around in order to make all of
them look better.
First, there was a curfew. For being an older man, Hef stayed up
reasonably late (usually tucking in around 11 P.M.), but he required his
girlfriends in by 9 P.M. Apparently, we couldn’t get into too much mischief outside the walls before that hour. I had been present once when
Vicky and Lisa had rolled in a half hour past curfew and got a major
dressing-down from Hef (no pun intended). He kicked his feet,
mustered up some questionable crocodile tears (was he really crying?
I thought), and told them that if they wanted to “stay out late” they
could move out. Needless to say, his temper tantrum made a lasting
impression on me.
Next, the girlfriends were not allowed to “fraternize” with the staff
unless absolutely necessary. This rule was not to be taken lightly. Hef
would totally lose it if he caught one of us talking with anybody on the
service team (and I eventually witnessed his irrational freak-out
firsthand when future girlfriend Kendra Wilkinson spent too much
time in the butler’s pantry). According to mansion lore, there were two
instances of girls having relations with mansion staffers. First, his exwife allegedly had an affair with one of the members of the security
team—and Hef found out. Second, one of the girlfriends had supposedly been caught sleeping with a butler. Now, I can’t prove that
either of these things happened, but it would explain why he was so
overly sensitive about this particular rule. In the beginning, I’m sure


the staffers thought I was terribly aloof and cold, but I was honestly
just scared shitless. If I got kicked out, I had nowhere to go. I couldn’t
risk it.
Each girlfriend was given a weekly “clothing allowance” of $1,000
for expenses. It was expected that we use this money to purchase
clothing to wear for evening events as well as beauty treatments (hair,
nails, waxing, etc.) that weren’t covered by his in-house account at
José Eber Salon in Beverly Hills. This was a welcome relief for me. It
was clear that Hef preferred we dress in a particular way when we
were out on the town with him, and I was desperate to revamp my
wardrobe and fast! Hef made it abundantly clear that he preferred us
in very over-the-top, sort of trashy outfits (think BeDazzled rhinestone
bustiers and skirts so short there was barely a point in wearing them).
When he would compliment a girl on a particular dress, pair of shoes,
or even the way she wore her hair, we all felt the need to replicate it for
our next evening out.
The last major requirement was that girlfriends attend the events
designated on Wednesdays, Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays. While
the girlfriends were always eager to party at the hottest Hollywood
nightclubs on Wednesdays and Fridays, it was clear they used
whatever excuse they could to get out of “dinner and a movie” nights.
Oftentimes, it would just be April and me flanking Hef at the main
dining table. We were still the two newest girls, so paying our dues was
part of the program. The other girls stayed out until 9 P.M. on the nose,
not wanting to miss even a single minute of freedom—which usually
meant visiting the boyfriends that they kept on the side.
How these “side boyfriends” felt about their girlfriends dating
Hugh Hefner, I don’t know. I imagine the girls weren’t forthcoming
with these men and probably denied that they even had sex with Hef
(they denied it to everyone). Most of them referred to “dating” Hef as a


big publicity stunt to help them launch their careers. Maybe some of
the guys got a perverted little kick out of the fact that they were dating
the same girl as Hugh Hefner. Who knows?
Contrary to popular belief, most nights at the mansion were
pretty boring. We usually ended up in one of the bedrooms gossiping
or watching TV. One night Lisa was hanging out in Vicky’s room and
the doors to our connecting bathrooms were open. When Tina came to
visit, I went into Vicky’s room to try and make an effort to be friendly
with the girls. Tina was excitedly talking about her “boyfriend,” and
like the socially awkward person I was, I asked her, “Do you feel like
he even takes you seriously when you live with Hef?”
My intention wasn’t to be mean; I actually wanted these girls to
like me! I was genuinely curious. When I shared the news that I’d be
moving into the mansion, I hadn’t met the warmest response, so I
wondered how everyone else’s friends, families, and even boyfriends
felt about it.
Tina whipped her head in my direction and snapped a dismissive
response at me. I grimaced and tried to apologize, but Tina wouldn’t
even look at me. She just rolled her eyes at Vicky.
As you could have predicted, Tina’s boyfriend didn’t stick around
long. In fact, none of the “side boyfriends” ever stayed longer than a
few months at most. I don’t think the men took them seriously. I always assumed most men were just using the girls to check some Playboy Bunny fantasy off their bucket list. I only ever saw one “side boyfriend” stick around: Hank Baskett.
Following the rules wasn’t difficult for me. I didn’t know too many
people in Los Angeles and I quickly cut out the small group of friends I
did have—either because I didn’t want to be subjected to their judgment or because they started to call asking for invites to the mansion
and other favors I couldn’t grant. Plus, I’ve always been a bit of a


homebody and much preferred the delicious home-cooked meals the
staff provided to dancing the night away at nightclubs (where I would
usually get pretty drunk purely out of sheer boredom). Most of the
girls would have rather died than sit around the dining table with men
three times their age, but I found Hef’s friends funny and interesting,
and genuinely enjoyed listening to all of their stories. Eventually, I
would convince myself that this was yet another component of the
common ground Hef and I shared as a couple.
Usually the movie nights included a steady rotation of Hef’s favorite classic films and I adore old movies—something we were truly
starting to bond over. Every Sunday night, Hef’s office would arrange
to have studios bring in movies that were still in theaters—and armed
guards would enter the mansion with giant film cans to screen the
newest Hollywood blockbuster for us. It was pretty cool, but it also
was sort of bizarre, because oftentimes celebrities or other important
Hollywood power players would join us for the screenings and be relegated to spending roughly two hours squirming in uncomfortable
metal folding chairs. For being a super upscale home, it wasn’t without
its downscale touches. One of the most memorable was the tray of
Johnson’s Baby Oil, Vaseline, and Kleenex that was in every bathroom, in the grotto, and at the tennis courts and the pool bar. I still
don’t know whether to be disgusted or amused by those trays.
At first, my constant attendance at all of the events deemed “boring” by the other girls earned me a bit of good grace with them. They
felt that I took some of the attention off their recurring absences while
they busied about with their outside lives. Girls would find crafty ways
to sneak out past curfew when they thought it wouldn’t be noticed—like hiding in the trunk of someone’s car as they drove off and
onto the property!


While evenings at the mansion were pretty regimented, during
the day we were virtually free to do as we pleased. Hef was usually
awake by 10 A.M. for breakfast, then meandered down the hall to his
office wing, where he would work on the magazine, various book projects, and other business. He wouldn’t emerge again until the evening.
In the beginning, I spent most days with Britney—a nice girl that I
had met at the Sunday pool parties. We’d go to the gym, tan, lay by the
pool, and cruise around L.A. searching for bargain clothes. The only
other girl I remember spending time with was Lisa.
Besides me, Lisa was the youngest girlfriend in the group at that
time. She lived in Bedroom 2, the largest of the bedrooms, and was
still celebrating the release of the issue in which she was the centerfold. She was a cute country girl who, according to the other girls,
dated Kid Rock on the side, though I never saw any evidence of it. She
had first auditioned for Playboy over a year prior to her Playmate
pictorial finally being published. Somewhere along the way, she met
Hef, became a girlfriend, and secured a centerfold after acquiring a
new set of Hef-financed breast implants to lift the mammaries that
he’d deemed “too droopy” for a Playmate.
Like most of the other girlfriends, she was both manipulative and
manipulated. Becoming a published centerfold didn’t happen
overnight. In fact, Playmate features were often shot 8 to 12 months
before they actually hit newsstands. According to Vicky, Lisa had been
a girlfriend for several months before losing patience.
“She threw a fit when we were out one night, asking when she was
going to finally shoot her centerfold,” Vicky once explained to me,
rolling her eyes and exhaling cigarette smoke. “She’s the baby, she always gets what she wants.”
“This is like a boy band,” my friend Britney added. “Hef has to
have an old one, a young one, a wild one . . .”


This brought a cackle out of Vicky, who rolled her eyes.
“He always plays the oldest one against the youngest one,” Vicky
explained, eager to share her expertise on the topic as we gossiped
about the situation. “Tina may be his main girlfriend, but she’s older,
so he likes to play on her insecurities by playing favorites with whoever the youngest one is. And Lisa isn’t special. Before her, he used
Buffy to play against Tina.”
I took note of this, but at the time I didn’t want to believe a man
as old and accomplished as Hef could be that petty and immature.
Vicky was starting to show her nasty side, so I wrote it off as jealousy
on her part.
Lisa was one of the friendlier girlfriends. In fact, when I walked by
her room one morning, she called me in.
“Hey, wanna go to Target with me later? I need to run some
errands.”
“Yeah, sure, lemme know what time!” I said, feeling lucky to be
invited. I was hoping she could fill me in a little more on how things
worked around the mansion, since Vicky and the others had given me
the cold shoulder.
“Ugh. I need to get lipo,” Lisa croaked, looking down at her belly
and pinching her spare tire. She was adorable, but had been told to
lose weight by a Playboy photo editor.
“No you don’t,” I said. “You look fine.”
“Thanks!” she replied through a toothy grin.
As I knelt down to pet one of her three dogs, she picked up the
phone next to her bed, pressed 0 for the butler’s pantry, and ordered a
piece of chocolate cake and a glass of chocolate milk for breakfast. Was
I in the twilight zone? Plastic surgery was so commonplace for these
women that liposuction sprung to mind as the obvious weight loss
cure before, say, taking chocolate cake out of your breakfast routine.


“Hang out here while I get ready,” Lisa demanded while hopping
into the bathroom. After she had chattered on about herself for about
10 minutes, her cake was finally delivered. She thanked the butler,
plopped the tray down on her bed, started shoveling the cake in her
mouth, and asked, “So, how do you like it here so far?”
Finally, someone I can talk to! I thought with relief. Now was a
good time to ask a few questions and confess a few of my insecurities
about this wild world I had just entered. I confided in Lisa that I
wasn’t too fond of April, that she really intimidated me.
“That’s okay, the rest of us don’t like her, either,” Lisa stated,
wrinkling up her nose. “Hef just likes her because she’s wild.”
“Oh, wow, thank God it’s not just me!” I sighed, feeling relieved.
Maybe April wouldn’t last that long and then we could all really be like
sorority sisters; all on the same team.
Feeling more and more comfortable with Lisa, I thought I would
ask her opinion about something that had started worrying me the
past few days.
“Hef hasn’t given me a bunny necklace yet,” I admitted meekly.
“Do you think that’s weird?”
Every Playmate and every girlfriend was presented with a bunny
pendant necklace from Hef. At the time, I (along with everyone else in
L.A.’s 30-mile zone) thought these necklaces were made with real diamonds. They had looked so glamorous, glittering on the chests of the
chosen ones who flitted about the Playboy parties, the hottest
nightclubs, and the spendiest shopping districts in L.A. (In reality, the
pendants were cubic zirconia, and if you could track down the Downtown L.A. jeweler who made them, anyone could purchase one for just
$100.)


My interest in acquiring a necklace had nothing to do with its
value, however. Sure, I coveted one, but my worry stemmed from what
it symbolized.
Hef’s words echoed in my mind: “You can stay for a while and
we’ll see how it works out.” Maybe I wasn’t making the cut. That had
to be why he hadn’t graced me with a necklace yet. In the few weeks I
had been there, he had presented one to Charis Boyle, an upcoming
centerfold, whom he had met after me. Somehow I had been skipped
over.
“Oh, he hasn’t?” Lisa asked, feigning amazement. “Ohhhh. Yeah, I
dunno why that is.” She purred as she put down her fork and
sauntered back into the bathroom.
I felt a knot form in my stomach. That was definitely not the reaction I had hoped for. Lisa’s sisterly vibe had me hoping she would reassure me that this was normal or perhaps even offer to ask for
me—after all, she seemed so comfortable around Hef and was certainly good at getting whatever she wanted.
As Lisa readied herself for the day and led me down to her car, my
mind was in turmoil. Was my time here almost over? I had barely been
at the mansion two weeks and already I didn’t seem to be making the
cut. What would I do now?
As it turns out, I wasn’t the only one with these kinds of anxieties.
As we wound our way through L.A. traffic down to Target in Culver City, Lisa kept babbling about herself. I found her stream-of-consciousness narrative fascinating, as her anxieties mirrored mine. The
only difference was that she had been here longer and had a centerfold
under her belt.
“See this?” she bragged, holding up her checkbook for me to see
the balance, which hovered just above $25,000.


“It’s the money I earned doing my Playmate pictorial!” she exclaimed proudly. “I haven’t touched a penny! You know, the other girls
aren’t even thinking. They have Hef leasing them cars they could never
afford and they spend money like there’s no tomorrow.”
She looked pleased with herself.
“Everyone made fun of me for getting this car,” she said, patting
the steering wheel of her brand-new Toyota RAV4. “But I want
something I can afford after I move out. I don’t need a Porsche.”
Smart, I thought. In fact, it was the first sensible thing I had
heard out of any of the girlfriends’ mouths so far.
As we roamed through Target, she filled her shopping cart with
everything from a nose hair trimmer to dog toys. “I always spend so
much at Target,” she sighed. “You always walk out of here with more
than you need.”
I smiled and nodded my head in agreement. Before another pause
could pass, Lisa started babbling again.
“You know, I don’t know if I could ever go back home,” Lisa continued. “One of my guy friends from home, the other day he got real
rude with me on the phone and said the only reason I got centerfold
was because I fucked Hef.”
I wasn’t 100 percent sure if she was even talking to me anymore—or just thinking out loud.
She shrugged her shoulders and tried to offer a halfhearted smirk,
but I could tell the comment bothered her deeply. I could certainly relate. Like me, I think she got into this situation without quite realizing
what a public decision it was.
“It’s not true. You’re gorgeous,” I offered, trying to cheer her up.
“You could have become a centerfold anyway.” And it was true. She
was curvy, cute, and baby-faced, resembling a petite version of Anna
Nicole Smith.


“Thanks,” she sighed, offering a weak smile. “But I can’t go back
home. I mean, what am I supposed to do? I’m not above working a
real job, but, like, if I’m working at a counter somewhere everyone I
know is gonna come up and be like ‘ohhhhh, Lisa, look where you are
now after posing naked.’ It’s embarrassing.”
I was just as anxious as Lisa was about the life that waited for me
outside the mansion gates. So many things seemed to be grounds for
dismissal that I was petrified to step out of line. While becoming an
actress was still a passion of mine, it was always best to keep any auditions quiet. After Brande Roderick had left Hef for Baywatch Hawaii,
he kept a much closer eye on any acting work the girlfriends tried to
pursue. I secretly hoped to land a role big enough that it would allow
me to leave the mansion after a few months, but those kinds of dream
jobs are few and far between. Eventually I would receive offers for
smaller parts in music videos and low-budget films—but the hours often went past our curfew and the jobs rarely paid much, so they hardly
seemed worth it. If anything, they would only land me in hot water
with my boyfriend who, as the weeks passed into months, appeared
more and more controlling. It seemed my acting dreams were stalled
for the time being. I felt caught between a rock and a hard place. I
thought having a rent-free roof over my head would make chasing my
dreams so much easier, but that wasn’t turning out to be the case.
I had managed to hold on to my day shifts at Hooters for a few
months—I guess Hef didn’t feel particularly threatened by a lowly
waitressing job—and I was able to slowly start paying off the debt I
had amassed in college. It wasn’t much, but it was a start. As they do
every year, Hooters chooses a waitress from each region to be featured
in the Hooters magazine and participate in their national bikini contest. One day, the general manager called me into her office and told
me that Hooters wanted me to represent Santa Monica.


I was very flattered. There were so many beautiful girls that
worked at the restaurant and they had chosen me! My friend Roxy had
been chosen the year before and had told me how much fun it was and
how many people she had met. I was still hoping to break into the entertainment world and was eager to take any opportunity—even if it
was just a pageant title.
“No,” Hef said when I told him about the offer and asked permission to leave for two days. I expected him to maybe pout a bit, but I
wasn’t really anticipating a flat-out no. Hef never seemed bothered by
my job, and since he wasn’t eager to feature me in Playboy, I couldn’t
imagine why he would care about me being in another magazine, especially since there was never anything racier than a bikini photo in the
Hooters magazine.
“You can’t do it,” he shouted, pounding his fists on his desk. His
voice had become irrationally loud.
“Why?” I asked. I had already agreed to do it and was totally perplexed by the strange tantrum he was throwing.
“Because you working there makes me jealous,” he yelled, his
hands flying in the air, doing his best to well up some more fake tears.
In the months I worked at Hooters, Hef never once expressed
feeling threatened by my being there. But now that I was getting an offer to do something fun, something that made me feel special, he all of
a sudden had an issue with it? The timing was a little too convenient.
Hef was waiting for me to argue or to cry, but I just stood silently
in front of his desk. I could see the anxiety creep across his face; he
didn’t know how to read my nonreaction, so he took it a step further:
“I don’t want you working there while you’re living in this house,” he
shouted, hoping this would evoke some response. He thrived on this
kind of drama; he was half hoping for me to surrender and half hoping
for a fight.


Without saying a word and as stoically as possible, I turned
around and saw myself out of his office. Inside, I was crushed, but I
was trying to keep my dignity.
The next day, with a heavy heart, I called the general manager and
let her know that not only could I not attend the pageant, I was quitting my job as well. Honestly, I can’t even remember what I said. It
was a crushing defeat—and it felt like I was saying good-bye to a part
of me. In hindsight, that incident should have been a blaring indicator
of what my life was going to be like behind those gates, but I still had
high hopes.
I felt like my last shred of independence was gone. But at that
point, I thought I’d seen the worst of it. It wasn’t an ideal world, but I
could make it work. I could find some happiness here while I figured
out my next move, I reasoned with myself. After all, it would only be a
few months, maybe a year . . . at most.

CHAPTER 4

“Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you
can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get
somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast
as that!”
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

Y

ou girls are basically Hef’s traveling harem, right?” asked the
eager New York magazine reporter, sticking a small silver voice recorder in my face.
Only a few weeks after I had moved into the mansion, Hef
whisked us away on a trip to New York City for his Comedy Central’s
Friars Club Roast. I’d never been to New York before; I’d actually never been off the West Coast before. It seemed so surreal—and slightly
absurd—that a reporter would be questioning me about my life with
Hugh Hefner.
“Umm,” I began, through a short laugh. I wasn’t quite sure how to
respond to this older, bespectacled journalist with the practical brown
bob. Despite what the nature of the event may suggest, I couldn’t be
certain if she was joking or not.


This particular roast had special meaning to New Yorkers. In the
wake of the September 11 tragedy, a dark cloud hovered over New
York—and the entire country for that matter. Comedy Central
reasoned that giving people an hour of time to laugh again might help
kick-start the healing process, and they decided to move forward with
Hef’s scheduled roast.
The day before the event, Hef, his girlfriends, and his staff (including his longtime assistant Mary O’Connor, his personal photographer, and a team of security) boarded a chartered private jet at Van
Nuys airport and headed to New York. The network hosted us at the
New York Hilton Midtown. Hef and Tina occupied the hotel’s regal
presidential suite while the rest of us were given gorgeous rooms with
breathtaking views of the city.
Whose life was I living? Private jets! Luxury hotels! Last month I
was barely making rent on a shitty shared apartment. There were
many perks to being one of Hugh Hefner’s girlfriends, including the
VIP treatment everywhere we went. I’ll be honest, being treated like
royalty wasn’t necessarily a hard routine to fall into. Sure, it was
mainly directed at Hef and we were considered ornamental, but reaping the benefits of his celebrity certainly had its moments.
Prior to the festivities, Hef was expected to walk the red carpet
with his seven girlfriends for brief press interviews and to pose for
photographers. The attire was black tie, so each girlfriend packed her
most glamorous cocktail dress or pantsuit. With my clothing allowance I was able to buy a retro style Betsey Johnson black and white
ball gown. I loved it, but I felt a little out of place after I realized how
conservative my poufy, below-the-knee dress looked next to the other
girls’ tighter and more revealing ensembles.


When we arrived in our stretch limo to the Waldorf Astoria hotel,
my heart fell into my stomach. I’d never been to an event like this in
my life—let alone on the arm of the guest of honor.
As we piled on each side of Hef for photographs outside the ballroom, I began shadowing the other girlfriends. Terrified to make any
kind of noticeable mistake, I mimicked the girls who appeared to be
veterans at this point. Like the other six, I plastered on my brightest
smile and stood patiently behind Hef as he conducted one interview
after the other. I had to watch my step, though. Simply falling into
place in line didn’t work for the other girls. One girlfriend, Carolyn,
shamelessly shoved me out of the way so she could stand closer to Hef.
(Because we were in front of the press, all of sudden, being as close as
possible to Hef was really important to all of the girls, who normally
couldn’t be farther away.)
When the New York magazine reporter shoved her device under
my nose, I was taken off guard. I didn’t want to seem unfriendly or
rude, so I answered her questions as politely as possible and excused
myself to follow the rest of the girlfriends into the ballroom.
“What did that reporter ask you?” Vicky hissed as I sat down at
the large banquet table closest to the stage.
“She asked me if we were a harem that travels with Hef.” I let out
a small laugh. To me, it was just a silly sounding question.
“What did you say?” Vicky asked me, her eyes like slits.
“I just sort of laughed and said, ‘Well, I guess so,’ ” I told her, a
smile still stuck on my face, completely unaware that I might have
done something wrong. I didn’t take the question literally. When she
said “harem,” I just thought she meant an ornamental group of women, not sex slaves. I had been around only a few weeks, how was I
supposed to know how to answer a question like that? I’d never
spoken to a reporter in my life!


“No,” Vicky spat at me, exasperated. “Don’t ever say that we sleep
with him. We always tell people that only Tina does that.” I could see
that I rattled her pretty hard. As Hef took his throne on stage, Vicky
spent the rest of the evening ignoring me and whispering to the other
girlfriends in between venomous glances. She’d clearly misled me in
the beginning; I guess I shouldn’t have been so shocked that she was
trying to mislead others, too. But exactly who did she think she was
fooling?
The irony wasn’t at all lost on me that the entirety of the evening
consisted of sex jokes implying that Hef was intimate with each of the
seven blondes sitting at his feet.
“I’ve read just about every issue of Playboy since I was 15 years
old,” began the host, Jimmy Kimmel, “And not once did I see a Playmate say that one of her turn-ons was fucking a 75-year-old man.”
INSIDE THE MANSION, LIFE wasn’t at all like what I dreamed it would be.
Instead of a nightly slumber party with six of your best friends, I had
entered the lion’s den. It gave a whole new meaning to the phrase
“keep your enemies close” and made a sorority house look like Bible
study.
By the time I had arrived, fewer and fewer opportunities were being offered to girlfriends to appear in the magazine—which meant the
pack was getting restless. Over the years, Hef had become wiser to the
girls’ true motivations. After achieving Playmate status, they no longer
found it necessary to stay at the mansion—or with Hef.
The truly gilded age of Playboy had long since passed and our
nightly rituals felt more Golden Girls than Playboy Club. Girls stuck
around on the off chance that they’d one day become a Playmate (or
until a better option came along), and Hef knew it. He decided he


wasn’t going to make any more of his girlfriends Playmates, but he
never told that to anyone. He dangled the possibility of Playmate-hood
in order to keep the girls interested. The more aggressive girlfriends
would take whatever measures necessary to secure a centerfold, even
ruthlessly throwing another girl under the bus if that meant she would
gain favor with him.
As always, Vicky was eager to bring as many girls up into the bedroom as possible. I could guess her reasoning: the more options Hef
had, the less likely she’d be called to duty. It seemed to me that she
made it her mission to lure every new Playmate up to the bedroom to
pay their dues. In those first few years, I would say the majority of the
Playmates eventually selected had found their way into Hef’s bedroom. I guess Vicky figured that if she had to sleep with Hef, they all
should have to sleep with him.
I was too naïve to realize it at the time, but Hef was the catalyst
for all the drama I was to experience at the mansion. He recognized
that some of the girls were warming up to me and began using my perfect attendance as one of his many tools to manipulate and control his
wild pack. Pitting the girlfriends against one another created an aggressive, competitive atmosphere where he alone benefited. During
one of my first nights at the mansion, the girlfriends had banded together on a Friday evening and told Hef they didn’t feel like going out
that night. I was the newest member of the crew, so I just sat there,
observing the confrontation.
“So . . . what do I say to my Party Posse?” he said, throwing up his
hands and wearing the most disappointed look ever on his face.
“Sorry, Hef,” Lisa said. “We’ll go out next week.”
Needless to say, Hef decided then and there that the girlfriends’
days of being chummy were over. After all, he couldn’t be outnumbered, could he?


It was in his best interest to have us wallowing in our own insecurities and pawing for his acceptance. Girlfriends that didn’t get along
gave him the feeling of being fought over—and being fought over made
him feel desired, something he was desperate to feel in his old age. A
stable environment among the girlfriends wasn’t much fun for him, so
he began using me as a means to reprimand them.
“Why can’t you just be a good girl like Holly?” Hef bemoaned to a
girlfriend who wanted a curfew extension, knowing full well that his
small remark would pin a bull’s-eye on my back for weeks. They began
resenting me for the very reason they initially accepted me.
A few weeks into my residency, it was obvious that Vicky was regretting the role she played in recruiting me into the fold. Initially,
Vicky must have thought that she could use what little relationship I
had with Adrianna to her advantage. Hef was totally smitten with
Adrianna—who looked like a perfect, fresh-faced beach bunny—so
Vicky, who was as mean as a snake, must have thought that I would
have some useful information she could use to help take her competition down. Since Adrianna had moved out of the mansion, it was clear
to me that my presence was no longer of use to Vicky. I think she continued to deal with me because she considered me average looking
compared to the rest of the girlfriends. (They all tried the best they
could to re-create that ideal of Pamela Anderson—I on the other hand
wasn’t interested in transforming myself into a Spearmint Rhino version of the Baywatch beauty. I wanted to look good enough to be a
Playmate, but still hold on to some of what made me unique—and,
frankly, avoid looking like a blow-up doll.) But as soon as Hef started
using me as a behavioral example, Vicky no longer wanted anything to
do with me.
Today, trying to recall how particularly hideously some of the girlfriends treated me is a bit difficult. I liken it to being the dorky girl in


the lunchroom who eats her sandwich quietly with her nose buried
deep in a book, praying she didn’t attract the unwanted attention of
the popular kids. That’s sort of how I felt, but unlike that little girl at
school, I couldn’t look forward to weekends or nights free from these
mean girls. I lived with them.
Prior to moving into the mansion, I’d been a fairly confident person, but it didn’t take long for my self-worth to start to crumble. After
being identified by the other girlfriends as persona non grata, I had
become the victim of their ruthless “mean girl-ing.” During dinners or
movie screenings, it wasn’t out of the ordinary for me to overhear their
loud whispers criticizing my appearance (my hair, my face, my
clothes). According to their ruthless taunting, I was the “hick girl”
from Nowheresville, USA. They found my optimistic attitude corny
and my confidence threatening, so they did whatever they could to
tear me down. Sadly, I have to say it worked. Any Playmates or Playmate candidates they befriended would join in, mocking me as well.
Hef’s hearing was already pretty deteriorated, so like him, I acted as if
I did not hear their harsh remarks. My silence only further incited
them and their attacks became more vicious.
Once I started acquiring a decent wardrobe, my clothing began
mysteriously disappearing. When I would send things downstairs to
be laundered, they would never make their way back. As a gift, each
girlfriend was given a gorgeous embroidered burgundy silk robe. We
all sent ours to be cleaned before an upcoming event, but only mine
went missing. I reverted to writing my name on the inside of each label
like a third-grader going away to camp, but even that wasn’t really any
kind of insurance policy.
I quickly learned that complaining about the girls’ antics served
zero purpose. You know the phrase “Don’t shoot the messenger”?
Well, Hef loved to shoot the messenger. He would make sure to twist


any complaint around into my own doing—and I’d end up apologizing
to him. He cultivated an environment where we were perpetually indebted to him. My priority became remaining in his good graces.
Regardless, whenever Hef was around, I stayed close to his heels.
Even though his presence didn’t necessarily protect me from their bullying, I felt somehow safer. The “Mean Girls” couldn’t be as obvious
for fear that he might turn his wrath on them.
Two months into my mansion residency, I finally got to attend my
first Playboy party as a girlfriend. With my clothing allowance, I was
able to go to Trashy Lingerie, a popular boutique, to pick out my costume (despite its name, it was way out of my price range before). I
chose a frilly Alice in Wonderland costume that came with a purse
shaped like a slice of cake with “Eat Me” written cheekily on it in white
Puffy Paint. The outfit was supposed to be sexy, but once again I had
chosen something quite conservative compared to the body-hugging
ensembles the other girlfriends chose.
When it came to public events and appearances, there was a protocol for the girlfriends to follow. Each of us was expected to meet Hef
in his room so we could all make our grand entrance into the party together. It wasn’t as exclusive as it might sound, as many of the girlfriends brought their female friends, who joined us for our entrance.
Everyone was dressed in something skintight: a spandex-clad race car
driver, a spandex-clad taxi driver, and a few spandex-clad cops. By
comparison, I felt like a giant frilly cream puff. When the time came to
walk downstairs, we all trailed down the grand staircase slowly with
Hef’s house camera crew filming every moment for posterity. Hef
trailed behind us, wearing the black-and-white-striped “Prisoner of
Love” jailbird costume he wore every year. When we arrived at the foot
of the stairs, we were instructed to line up in two rows so Hef’s house
photographer could take our group portrait. After the short photo


session was finished, I followed the group out into the tented backyard
and towards Hef’s table next to the dance floor. On our way out, a naked woman clad only in body paint shoved a tray in front of me.
“Jell-O shot?” she asked.
“Don’t mind if I do,” I said with a smile, grabbing a green one off
her tray.
“The red ones are the best,” Vicky snapped at me with a cold smile
as soon as I reached Hef’s table with my green shot in hand. She was
right; the red ones did taste the best. Never having had a Jell-O shot
before, I was amazed at how delicious they were—and clueless at how
potent they were. Needless to say, I got wasted. Fast.
The girlfriends pretty much ignored my existence the whole night,
so luckily I spotted some of my old Hooters friends and motioned for
them to come over and talk to me. The novelty of my position as “Hef’s
newest girlfriend” hadn’t worn off yet, so everyone had plenty of questions (the less polite of which I dodged with non-answers).
As girlfriends, the protocol was that we stay at Hef’s table all
night. We could get up and dance, as long as we stayed on the dance
floor in front of the table. The only time we were allowed to leave was
to go to the bathroom. There were times when some of the girls managed to get away for short periods of time, due to the fact that Hef was
so distracted by all the partygoers clamoring for his attention. Star
fucking was a priority for most of the girls, so they tried to sneak away
and meet as many famous men as possible. One of the biggest running
jokes among the girls was when a girlfriend (who owned a pet
capuchin monkey she liked to tote around for attention) took Jennifer
Lopez’s ex-husband Cris Judd up to her room to “show him her
monkey.”
When Hef was ready to leave the party (usually around 1 A.M.) we
had to go upstairs with him. Of course, there were always girlfriends


who snuck back down to the parties after Hef was asleep, to chase men
or hobnob with celebrities, but they were always very discreet about it.
After all, Hef’s videographers wandered the parties until the wee hours
capturing all the goings-on, and none of the girls wanted to get caught
on tape. By the next afternoon, Hef’s video department would have a
tape sitting outside Hef’s door with a “highlight reel” from the last
night’s party, copies of which would be sent to local news stations. So
much for “what happens at the mansion stays at the mansion!”
That year, Playboy would collaborate with Girls Gone Wild to release a DVD titled Playboy Mansion Parties Uncensored. The DVD—a
compilation of all kinds of random party footage, including nudity and
celebrity sightings—flew off the shelves. The effect that particular
business venture had on the brand was questionable, however. The
overeagerness of Playboy to exploit what went on at the mansion
parties dirtied the cachet of these events that were once considered exclusive and glamorous. No longer feeling like their privacy was being
respected, fewer and fewer A-list celebrities wanted to attend anymore. Understandably so.
The night ended with me passed out on my bedroom floor with a
cheeseburger in my lap. It had become clear to me that being a part of
Hugh Hefner’s “party posse” wasn’t as glamorous as it seemed. This
was a far cry from what I pictured life here would be like when I first
laid eyes on the gorgeous Bentley twins a year and a half earlier at the
Midsummer Night’s Dream Party. The situation was also much lonelier than I could have ever imagined. Not to mention more stressful.
The day-to-day stress of mansion life had taken such a toll on me
that I could feel myself mentally regressing. My memory started to
dull—and things I used to know with certainty started to fade from my
mind. I’ve always considered myself an intelligent girl, but I could feel
myself getting dumber and began second-guessing everything. That


might sound insane, but I suppose you are the company you keep . . .
and let’s just say the other six girlfriends weren’t necessarily winning
any spelling bees.
I was so constantly on edge that I eventually developed a stammer
when speaking, so I tried as best I could to stay quiet and not risk the
embarrassment of tripping over sentences.
To Hef, my shrinking violet personality was a sign of submission
that he used to manipulate the other women. It helped my rise
through the girlfriend ranks to become among Hef’s favorites.
Over time, I convinced myself that I did actually care for this man
. . . that I wanted to be in a relationship with him despite the fact that
I didn’t really know him. Of course, living with someone, you learn
things about their personalities, their tics and their annoyances, but
Hef and I never really talked . . . not about things that mattered. There
were no deep conversations or romance between us.
As far as his girlfriends were concerned, we were better seen and
not heard. His friends were there for his intellectual stimulation; my
job was to show up and look pretty. Even our daily dialogue was superficial. If ever I tried to speak to him about books, politics, or world
events, he would scoff at whatever I said. It didn’t matter if my remark
was educated or even correct, because if I said it, it must be wrong.
During movie nights, he would lean over to me to explain plotlines and
time periods in the most condescending of ways. Oftentimes I would
have to bite my tongue. It was all I could do to keep from screaming: “I
know!” Clearly he was used to, or preferred, a woman with no more
than a grade school level education.
But I was young and blinded by his fame and accomplishments.
What wasn’t to love about Hef? I told myself. Because of his generosity, I was living on this gorgeous estate, attending swanky Hollywood
parties, and had money to spend on clothes, shoes, hair, and makeup.


So I reasoned with myself that no two people are exactly the same. Of
course we won’t see eye to eye on everything, I thought.
With that in mind, I began noticing only his good qualities: he
was smart, kind to his friends, appreciated the arts, and had a sense of
humor. I chose to see my world through rose-colored glasses and ignored all of his bad qualities, no matter how over the top they were.
Like Beauty locked up in the Beast’s castle, I developed my own
brand of Stockholm syndrome, identifying with my captor. I felt like
there was no one I could turn to besides Hef. I thought I could trust
him.
Somehow Hef became the “good guy” in my eyes. Slowly I started
to isolate myself from the other girls (for good reason) and from everyone outside the gates (for other reasons). I developed a reputation as
an ice queen, since I was so quiet and kept to myself.
On the outside, Hef appeared to be the perfect gentleman—an act
that paired nicely with my delusions. He always described himself as a
“hopeless romantic” and acted as if his womanizing was some long
search for the perfect woman that didn’t exist. Whether this image was
calculated to make him more palatable to the public, more endearing
to potential conquests, or both, I don’t know. All I know is that it
worked on me like a charm. I felt strangely protective of him. The other girlfriends used him, mocked him, and even cheated on him with
the boyfriends they kept outside the mansion. They made him look
foolish and I resented them for it, all the while overlooking the fact
that we were mice trapped inside the glamorous maze he created. It
was survival of the fittest and we all were just trying to come out alive.
I convinced myself that I could look past his age and appearance.
Perhaps we’re right for each other, I routinely told myself. After all, I
had never fit in anywhere else before and certainly hadn’t had any


luck at love. Maybe guys my own age just weren’t for me, I thought.
Maybe I was always meant to one day find Hef.
And just like that, I was in love. It didn’t seem to matter that I
couldn’t recall how or why. Simply put, it was just a decision I made.
BY THE TIME CHRISTMAS rolled around, I had already been at the mansion for four months. Nobody told me beforehand what the expectations were for us as girlfriends during the holidays, so I was surprised
to find out that Christmases were always spent with Hef. Girlfriends
were given “off” days before or after the holiday to visit family and
friends, but there were no exceptions for the actual day itself. That was
the one house rule that no one seemed to mind, because Christmas
was when Hef was most generous with his girlfriends.
Hef really is a big kid at heart—and he loves the magic of Christmas morning. The mansion was always decorated from top to bottom,
a formal Christmas dinner was held every year, and he spared no expense under the Christmas tree.
Each girlfriend was given $500 to spend on gifts for each girl living at the mansion at that time and $500 for ourselves—the idea was
seven sets of matching gifts. With six other girls in residence, that was
$3,500 to spend!
I selected elegant Louis Vuitton leather evening purses for each of
us—they would be perfect for our nights out! My understated choice
wasn’t gaudy enough for Tina, however, she returned my gift in exchange for a Louis Vuitton bucket purse with the brand’s logo emblazoned all over it.
Carolyn got us Gucci purses; April chose fur jackets (I ended up
donating mine to the Goodwill—real fur has never been my thing);


Candice (who had stepped into the spot Adrianna had left vacant)
picked out large Gucci travel totes, and Vicky selected Gucci shoes.
While the showering of luxurious items was beyond anything I’d
ever imagined having just a few months earlier, we didn’t have the financial freedom many people assumed. Not even close.
Obviously, we all wanted to save money. But Hef knew that
money equals freedom to walk out the door, so he was exceptionally
careful how he spent it on us. When Tina and Lisa chose Best Buy gift
certificates to give each girlfriend at Christmas, Hef let it be known
that he was severely displeased. I suppose gift cards too closely resembled cash for his taste.
After Christmas, Lisa became the first girlfriend to depart since
Adrianna had left four months earlier. She found a modest apartment
in L.A. and sent her three dogs home to her mom back east. And just
like that, she packed up her things and drove off the property. Despite
working regularly with Playmate Promotions, rumor had it she ran
through her savings in just a few months and ended up moving back to
her hometown after all. When I heard the news, my heart sank for her.
She wanted so desperately to make it, to prove wrong all of those cynics back home who judged her decision to pose for Playboy. But I
couldn’t help but think that they’d been right. Where did it get her?
“She thought she was such hot shit,” some of the girls gloated.
“She thought she had it made because she was a Playmate and she
couldn’t even cut it out there on her own for a few months.”
Wow, she had a centerfold and everything, I thought. Even booking appearances as a Playmate couldn’t keep her afloat in L.A. They
were talking about her as if she were a laughingstock. It was clear I
needed to land a good job or a few decent roles before I could ever go
back out on my own. I wasn’t having any luck landing a centerfold and
even that wasn’t looking like the most secure gig anymore.


When it came to our weekly clothing allowance, I socked away as
much of it as I could to pay off my student loans and credit card debt
and begin creating a modest savings. It proved difficult, though, because we had to make sure that our allowance always appeared well
spent.
When Hazel, one of Hef’s administrative assistants, suspected
that a girl wasn’t spending the money the way it was intended, she
would let Hef know. Most of the girls were intolerable to the staff—and
she was sick and tired of all the users.
“You should stop giving them so much clothing allowance,” Hazel
told Hef. “They just wear bras and panties to the parties—they’re
clearly not spending it on clothes!”
This would always send him into a tizzy and Tina would end up
having to go to bat for herself and the other girls to make sure Hef
didn’t lower the allowance. It was clear that we had to have something
to show for the money he gave us and therefore it became a balancing
act: save as much money as you could, but spend enough so that our
allowance doesn’t get cut.
Another well-placed catch-22 was the car situation. Girlfriends always got new cars while living at the mansion. Like everything else,
what we drove around town in was a direct reflection of Playboy—and
we had to keep up the image (not to mention, these new fancy cars
kept many females salivating over a spot in Hef’s harem). Although
Hef could easily buy each girl a car 10 times over if he wanted, he
knew better than to buy the vehicles outright. Instead, he leased the
cars for us. Doing things this way protected him from having girls
drive right off in paid-for cars. Plus, it was another genius way to control us. If a girlfriend decided to leave the mansion, it’s unlikely she
would be able to meet the payments on her extravagant new ride. So


she either had to stay, risk the car getting repossessed, or leave it
behind.
One such car was a white Cadillac Escalade with monster truck
tires, a lift kit, rims, and every other possible tricked-out add-on that
was leased for former girlfriend Buffy Tyler. Buffy was a baby-faced,
snub-nosed girl from Texas who had recently moved out after becoming Miss November 2000. Mary O’Connor, who had taken a liking to
me, actually came to my rescue and suggested that Hef let me drive
the repossessed SUV. When she mentioned my Celica, she wrinkled
her nose. She was right. It looked like it belonged in a scrap yard—not
in the driveway of the Playboy Mansion.
Happily and gratefully, I accepted, even though the car was way
too big and gaudy for my taste. After all, beggars can’t be choosers.
Little did I know that accepting the new ride would cause the other
girls to hate me even more (if that was possible). Not only was the Escalade more expensive than anything the other girls drove, but Hef
had paid for all the pricey bells and whistles Buffy had installed on the
car, something he wouldn’t do for any of the other girls. (Playing favorites and causing jealousy among the girlfriends was yet another
little game he enjoyed.) Obsessed with counting every last penny of
who got what, the girls knew the value behind all the features Buffy
had chosen for the luxury SUV. The cold shoulders I received were extra frigid for a good month after I started driving that car.
Besides Christmas, clothes, and cars, the other large expense that
Hef was happy to spend his money on were cosmetic enhancements.
People often ask me if the girlfriends were required to have plastic
surgery while living in the mansion, because it was clear so many of us
did. The answer is both simple and complex. No, we were not obligated to have plastic surgery while living there. However, the mansion
was a virtual breeding ground for superficial insecurities. And most


girls who lived there ended up with body dysmorphic disorders. No
matter how beautiful they were, these women would pick themselves
apart—ordering one procedure after the next.
It was known that if a girlfriend did choose to undergo some sort
of plastic surgery, Hef would foot the bill. The most popular procedures among the girlfriends were breast augmentations (both new and
redone), rhinoplasty, and liposuction. Eventually, I would ask for my
own nose job, but that was only part of my Playboy makeover.
During my first few months at the mansion, I was still a collegeaged girl who actually liked herself. Without school and work, I
quickly became bored and filled my days with activities typical of a
22-year-old girl: shopping, working out, getting my belly button
pierced, things like that. One day, my friend Britney and I decided to
go get tattoos. I got a small Playboy Bunny tattooed in the middle of
my lower back (talk about a tramp stamp!), because I thought it was a
cute, fun way to commemorate this crazy experience. This was back
when I thought my mansion stay was going to be a short-lived
stepping-stone that would soon lead me to something bigger.
At the time, my only real beauty routine consisted of bleaching my
own roots with Clairol ultra-blue from the drugstore. One day, as I was
performing the ritual in my bedroom with the door open, one of the
girlfriends popped her head in.
“What are you doing?” she snarled, with a scrunched nose.
“Dying my hair,” I said, defensively. What did it look like I was
doing? I knew these wannabe Beverly Hills bitches looked down on
anything do-it-yourself. “I need to save money. I can’t spend it all at
the salon.”
I actually hadn’t been to a salon in my life.
“Ohhhh,” she cooed maliciously, a smirk slowly spreading across
her face. “That’s smart.” She laughed and sauntered down the hall.


What she failed to tell me was that Hef had an open tab at the
José Eber Salon in Beverly Hills, and all the girlfriends had their hair
and nails professionally done there several times a week. None of the
girls had bothered to share this piece of information with me, because
keeping me as homely as possible was in their best interests.
Finally, I found out about the salon privileges when Vicky had lost
patience with me using the strong-smelling dye in our shared
bathroom.
“You know you don’t have to do your own hair, right?” she finally
snapped.
When I arrived at the José Eber Salon, it was like arriving in a
whole new world. The staff whisked me into the salon and immediately changed my bright gold hair into the light platinum blond Hef
loved. They straightened my naturally frizzy mane and planted long
acrylic nails on top of my short ones.
Meanwhile, months of utilizing the mansion’s gym and tanning
beds had taken about 10 pounds off my figure and bronzed my skin into a smooth, perfect tan. Hef’s dentist had given me a bleaching kit for
my teeth, which gave my smile a perfect bright Hollywood glow.
The pictures we received the morning after each of our club nights
out provided me with countless opportunities to study how I photographed. I quickly set about honing my makeup skills (which were virtually nonexistent before the mansion). During my first few months
there, I don’t think I wore much besides powder and maybe a little
mascara. Compared to the Playmates’ carefully contoured faces, my
sparse and natural look wasn’t cutting it. My work-free days gave me
hours and hours to shop for and experiment with makeup. I learned
how to make my lips look bigger, my eyes more catlike, and my eyebrows fuller and more defined. I felt like I was finally beginning to
look like the glamorous Playmate I had always wanted to be!


Staring at my photos, though, I knew there was one last thing to
fix. I’d never really been fond of my nose—it was a little too big for my
taste, but I rarely thought about it. It wasn’t until I started seeing
countless pictures of myself day after day that I realized it photographed even bigger than it was. I compared myself with the Playmates in our group photos—most of whom had tiny, unnoticeable
noses. Hef’s favorite girls had “baby faces” with upturned snub noses. I
started to feel like it was about time I did something about it.
While plastic surgery was a common request among the girlfriends, I was still terrified to discuss the idea with Hef. I was uncomfortable enough with my current living situation, so the last thing I
wanted to do was ask for anything more. I already felt like enough of a
hooker—I didn’t need to fan the flame. Eventually, though, I caved.
All the other girls get procedures, I told myself. It’s only fair that
I should be able to get one, too.
I took a deep breath and approached Hef. I had spent time doing
my research and decided to enlist the help of the same doctor who had
performed a nose job on one of Hef’s former girlfriends—a surgery so
successful that Hef said he’d “never seen such a transformation before.” After dinner one night, I nervously brought the quote from the
plastic surgeon to his room and shakily explained that I wanted to get
my nose fixed. He gave me an obligatory two-minute speech about
how I didn’t need the surgery, but quickly approved it despite his
short-lived chivalry.
It felt like a victory at the time, but I now recognize that it was one
of those watershed moments in life. Sure, my new nose gave me a temporary surge of self-confidence (and I was absolutely thrilled with the
results), but it wasn’t my appearance that was in need of immediate
attention.


In a few short months, I had gone from a friendly, optimistic, confident woman to a confused girl with a nervous stammer who secondguessed every thought that went through her head and rationalized
every bad decision she made. I was so focused on “making it” and
turning this bad decision I had made into something positive that I
couldn’t see that all I was really doing was running faster and faster in
circles trying to please Hef and simply stay afloat in his twisted world.
I had no time or energy left to chase my dreams.
By this point, Tina Jordan had moved out and Hef had promoted
me to his “main” girlfriend. One might think this would offer me some
kind of protection from the “Mean Girls,” but no such luck.
Actually, the other girlfriends all but shoved me into the number
one slot. As Hef’s main girlfriend, you were under the microscope. The
“Mean Girls” reveled in their lives outside the mansion and didn’t
want the extra responsibility where Hef was concerned. Unlike the
other girls, I didn’t mind most of the rules. I didn’t have an outside
boyfriend and I wasn’t crazy about clubbing, so I didn’t mind the 9
P.M. curfew. The “Mean Girls” viewed it as a win-win. If I was ever
present as the main girlfriend, their lack of perfect attendance
wouldn’t be as heavily scrutinized, but I wasn’t “hot” enough to be any
kind of real competition for the limited Playmate of the Month spots.
If they were ever asked why Hef preferred homely little old me best,
I’m sure they would lie and say it was because I was the only one who
slept with him . . . just like they had all said about Tina.
Despite the presumed prestige in its title, there was nothing ceremonious about becoming Hef’s number one girlfriend. After Tina’s
centerfold was published and she announced her departure, Hef
simply asked me if I wanted to move into his room. That was sort of it.
No promises were made; no piece of token jewelry was given. I simply


prepared to pack up my things and move them down the hall . . . but
not before Tina took the opportunity to remind me who was boss.
Just as I was beginning to move to Hef’s room, Tina dropped another bomb. She announced that she had decided not to move out
after all. The other girls didn’t even try to hide their smirks as she
shared this news with me (in front of everyone). It was clear I was the
only one left out of this loop. My face burned red with embarrassment.
“So, you can just quit packing up your things,” Tina said in her
fake singsong voice as she picked up her purse and followed an
oblivious-acting Hef out to the limo. I was hurt and embarrassed, but
the subject was never broached again that night, so I just pretended
the whole thing never happened.
Over the next few weeks, Tina would show up halfway through
movie nights only to shove me out of the way so she could sit next to
Hef. She did the same thing with buffet dinners and would make a
huge show out of forcing me to move my chair over so she could sit by
Hef.
I’m not sure if Tina was trying to make an impression on Hef so
that he would be more likely to give her Playmate of the Year or if she
simply had that much fun torturing me. Eventually, though, the novelty wore off and Tina left for good.
Being tossed back and forth like a useless rag doll by the man I
had come to look to for approval did a massive number on my self-esteem. When I finally made the official transition into Hef’s master
suite, it felt anticlimactic. I was actually moving all of my belongings
from a normal-sized bedroom into a tiny corner of Hef’s closet called
“the Vanity.” These cramped living quarters—without even a speck of
privacy—was another reason none of the other girls were clamoring
for the title of “girlfriend number one.” The back area of Hef’s closet
contained a vanity, an island dresser, and closet space lining the walls.



There was just enough room to walk between the island and the vanity, but that’s it. In what looked like a castle’s tower from the outside,
the vanity had a few thin windows that looked out over the driveway. A
musty rose-colored chair and a nightstand with a small box TV were
wedged in front of the windows.
I later talked Hef into installing a desk in place of the TV and
chair and putting down beautiful hardwood floors in place of the white
carpet, which had long ago been ruined by dogs and Lord knows what
else. I had a hard time believing that an elegant man like Hef (or so I
assumed) preferred the nasty old carpet to the classic hardwood floors
that so complemented the rest of the room. I was wrong. Instead, Hef
insisted the change was a huge sacrifice he made for me and that “if
this doesn’t show you how serious I am about you, nothing will.”
Did he really just suggest that his love for me was reflected by
his willingness to rip up decades-old carpet? I thought. Yes, yes, he
did.
Speaking of declarations of love, now that I was Hef’s number one
girlfriend, the vows of love flowed freely, just as they had to Tina days
earlier. “I love you” was something he said often and to anyone he was
even remotely involved with, including me on what was our second
night out together. I realized that was abnormal, but I came to hope
that those feelings were true, particularly as he started referring to me
in front of friends as the “love of his life” and telling the press he expected to spend the rest of his life with me. That last quote quickly
turned into a punch line as late-night comedians speculated if the “rest
of his life” meant one or two more years.
I suppose the main girlfriend role did have some other “perks.”
Suddenly, Playmates who had once mocked me were kissing my ass,
bringing me gifts, and showering me with compliments now that I was
Hef’s number one girlfriend. The sudden shift in the way some of



those girls acted was completely obvious and shameless, but I suppose
they thought I was too dumb to notice or that I would be so grateful to
be treated kindly for a change that I wouldn’t object. The reality was, I
knew I had to choose my battles wisely. I graciously accepted their
gifts and their compliments, but I wasn’t stupid and I never forgot how
they had treated me before, when I was just the lowest blonde on the
totem pole.
Despite being on the receiving end of Hef’s romantic declarations
and suddenly being “popular” with the Playmates, I still wasn’t exempt
from Hef’s harsh criticisms. Among the many unspoken rules at the
mansion, the red lipstick rule was one of the more notorious. Hef
hated red lipstick. It was one of the few helpful hints I managed to
squeeze out of Vicky. I’m not overexaggerating here; Hef absolutely
despised red lipstick and wouldn’t allow his girlfriends to wear the
color.
“Maybe he doesn’t want lipstick on his collar,” Vicky had suggested years earlier. I always found it so hard to believe, because Hef has
such a deep appreciation for the gorgeous film stars of the golden age
of Hollywood. Betty Grable, Alice Faye, and his muse, Marilyn Monroe, were always painted with succulent red lips. It didn’t make any
sense that he wouldn’t want his girlfriends to exude that same kind of
glamour, so I didn’t take her warning too seriously.
I would learn my lesson the hard way.
About six months after moving into the mansion, I felt ready for
another makeover. I loved my waist-length thick, natural hair. In fact
it had long been the physical attribute I was most proud of—mainly
because it was the only thing I had that all the other girlfriends, with
their extensions and clip-in locks, had to buy. New girls were always
coming through the mansion’s revolving front door, but I was the only
one with enviable hair.



Until Mary Jo. She was a southern belle flown out from Alabama
for a Playmate “test shoot.” She had ass-length blond all-natural hair
and was dead-set on becoming Hef’s newest girlfriend. This woman
wasn’t just any old blonde; she was single-handedly hijacking the only
thing that made me different. I couldn’t believe how threatened I felt
by her. The fact that I could be so easily upset by something like this
made me want to rebel, to do something that would make me an individual, so that I wouldn’t constantly feel so replaceable.
I was cracking under the pressures of living at the mansion and
resented the fact that everyone had to look like such a clone. Save for
the blond hair, the big boobs, and our shared address, I had absolutely
nothing in common with these girls. So why should we have to look
like we were carbon copies of one another?
I decided to take it upon myself to embrace a more retro aesthetic—a look that captured the old Hollywood glamour I was so fascinated with. Think: more Marilyn, less Pamela.
One sunny afternoon, I decided to do the unthinkable: chop off all
my hair. I drove directly to the hair salon and instructed my stylist to
cut off about 20 inches of platinum blond hair. It was a drastic move,
but I felt liberated by my short new coif. While all the girls were in a
race to see who could have the longest hair possible, I had a flirty chinlength bob. I completed the look by having the hairdresser and
makeup artist style me like Marilyn Monroe. Though I was making the
change for me, I was also sure that Hef wouldn’t mind. After all, he
worshipped Marilyn and often cited her as the ideal in feminine
beauty.
When I got back to the mansion, complete with curled bob, black
eyeliner, and red lips, I sat down at my vanity. This is a fun look, I
thought, admiring my new reflection as I heard Hef shuffle into the
bedroom.



“Come in here, Puffin,” I said in a happy singsong voice, “I want
to show you something!” I stood up and straightened out my white
Juicy Couture jumpsuit when he finally appeared in the doorway.
“What did you do?” he spat at me. Instantly, I was taken aback.
“I got a little makeover,” I said sheepishly, giving a slight pat to
my new hair. Any shred of confidence I found over the last few hours
was quickly evaporating. “I thought you would like it.”
“Well, I don’t,” he hissed, taking a moment to analyze my new
makeup and hair. My eyes immediately darted to the floor. I didn’t
know what to say. Of all the reactions he could have had, I was the
least prepared for this one. I stood there, silent.
“Actually, I hate it,” he continued, the words shooting like knives
off his tongue. “I hate the whole look. I hate the makeup and I hate the
red lipstick.”
I couldn’t help the tears that began streaming down my face, ruining the makeup I had been so excited about. I sank back onto the
tufted stool. Was this really happening? He had never yelled at me like
this before.
“Don’t ever wear red lipstick again,” he warned me in a low voice
and turned towards the door. I was utterly dumbfounded; it was such
an irrational reaction to something so small. Even once he saw me crying, there wasn’t an ounce of sympathy in his voice; he only saw red
(pun intended).
He paused and turned back around to survey my reaction. Deciding he hadn’t done enough damage, he served me one final blow before storming out of the room: “You look old, hard, and cheap.”
That was it; end of conversation. But that’s how disagreements always ended with Hef; he would just stomp off and you were left to pick
the pieces of your self-worth up off the floor. I’d invested every part of
myself in Hef and the mansion and had nothing waiting for me outside



those gates. I felt so trapped and so vulnerable to his criticisms. This
old man had just humiliated me—and I sat there taking his ridicule
like a child. I curled up on the vanity stool and sobbed for what felt
like forever, in the one little corner of this whole giant mansion that
was supposed to be my own. But even that wasn’t real. It was his
world—all of it.
He made no mention of the conversation again. When you’re the
king of all you survey, you don’t really need to say much more. His
point was clearly made. For many years his words rang in my ears:
“old, hard, and cheap.”
Who says that to a person they supposedly love?
The whole episode made me feel beyond ugly, as if all the beauty
products and cosmetic surgery in the world couldn’t make me look
good. I felt like an idiot for even trying to be beautiful. Maybe I was
just the homely girl who was “lucky” enough for Hef to allow into the
mansion. That’s certainly how his actions made me feel. Needless to
say, from then on, I stuck religiously to corals, pinks, and nudes, never
daring to try red lipstick in front of him again.
Just when I was starting to give up hope that I could ever find any
real positivity in Hef’s twisted world, someone new caught my eye. I
looked up from my book and adjusted the messy bun on top of my
head that was disguising my poorly received new haircut.
I wonder who that is, I thought. A bubbly Carmen Miranda–costumed blonde sauntered across the pool area handing out shiny
beaded necklaces with tiny bottles of Jack Daniel’s attached to all of
the partygoers.
“Happy Cinco de Mayo!” The girl beamed, a huge, gleaming smile
on her face as she handed me a necklace. She had a large, red headdress balanced on top of her head and seemed unusually perky.



“Thanks!” I said, accepting the beads and watching her walk over
to Hef’s backgammon table. How fun, I thought. Lately, I had become
used to putting on a cheerful facade, since on the inside I was essentially Eeyore with a rain cloud following my every step. This girl was
like a ray of sunshine so unlike the other Fun in the Sun party guests,
all of whom spent the days self-consciously preening themselves while
wearing boring basic bikinis. She seemed to glide right out of an old
Hollywood musical!
I assumed she had to work for Playboy or Jack Daniel’s or
something. I mean, you had to be getting paid to be that bubbly, right?
That evening, after freshening up, I wandered downstairs for dinner and heard someone blurt out, “You cut your hair!” My new look
had been so poorly received that I wasn’t expecting any sort of compliments when I arrived in the great hall. Immediately, I spotted Miss
Chiquita Banana sitting on the bench in a Clueless-inspired plaid skirt
and matching top.
“Oh yeah,” I finally replied, self-consciously running my hand under my new blond bob. “I donated it to charity.”
“Oh, Locks of Love?” she asked, seeming genuinely interested.
“Yeah,” I said, feeling the tension in my shoulders begin to melt
away. “They say they don’t take colored hair, but my hair is really
strong and it was super long, so I sent like 20 inches off in case they
could turn it into a wig or something.”
It was the most I had said in hours . . . maybe days. Something
about this girl allowed me to relax. I didn’t feel like I needed to be on
guard and I could sense that she genuinely wanted to be my friend.
“Oh, that’s so sweet! I’ve always wanted to do that,” she cooed before sticking her hand out in front of me. “I know we’ve met before,
but I’m Bridget.”



“I’m Holly,” I said, a smile taking over my face. “It’s really nice to
meet you again.”
Bridget started popping up around the mansion pretty regularly
after that. Much to my surprise, she was just another girl invited to
spend time at the mansion; her cheerfulness wasn’t an act and she
wasn’t being paid to promote a brand, as I had initially assumed. She
didn’t have that same desperate air about her that plagued most of the
girls who frequented Hef’s place. Plus, she wasn’t another platinum,
plastic wannabe: this girl was refreshingly natural. She had dark blond
hair, natural makeup, was plastic surgery free, and was always outfitted in some sort of themed ensemble. She was a walking, talking candy
cane and I liked having her around. In a way, she reminded me of myself before Hef and his girlfriends had completely stripped me of my
confidence.
It wasn’t long before we became best friends. Her energy was contagious, making it nearly impossible to ever be in a bad mood when
you’re with her. Plus, it was a welcome relief to have a new friend in
the house.
Eventually, Bridget Marquardt became one of Hef’s girlfriends.
When she moved in, I had already been at the mansion for more than
a year and had been witness to the comings and goings of quite a few
girlfriends. But for once, I didn’t mind a new face taking up residence.
Looking back, I often wonder if having a friend like Bridget earlier
might have saved my sanity. If I had had anyone else to turn to besides
Hef, maybe I would have been able recognize the situation for what it
was instead of convincing myself to fall in love with him.

CHAPTER 5

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they
all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

O

ver the year I lived with her at the mansion, Vicky became increasingly hostile. She wanted desperately to be a Playmate, but Hef
was done making girlfriends centerfolds—only we didn’t know that
then. Hef still let the possibility linger, knowing it was the key to attracting and keeping countless young girlfriends. Earning Playmate
status became Vicky’s obsession. A new crop of girls had moved into
the mansion over the past year and Vicky was hell-bent on beating this
new group to the coveted title. It seemed to me that she felt her seniority in the group gave her an edge or made her an exception when it
came to snagging herself a centerfold.
“If he’s not going to give me a centerfold, I’m at least going to get
everything I can out of this place,” Vicky fumed in my general direction. She had invited me to her room to “talk,” something we hadn’t
done since my earliest days at the mansion. After Lisa became a
centerfold and moved out a few months earlier, Vicky moved up into
one of the largest of the rooms designated for girlfriends.



I watched as she stumbled around the large pink room, trying to
avoid tripping over the piles of junk she’d amassed in every corner, including those covering a long white couch that had occupied the room
since the ’80s. She motioned that I grab a seat on her bed, but I was
unsure how to navigate the journey. I was fairly certain that this particular room had plush white carpeting, but you couldn’t see the
ground anywhere. Random trinkets, mementos, and tchotchkes were
scattered about: a skateboard collection, a wall full of Barbie dolls still
in their original packaging, an oversize aquarium, a Ping-Pong table
covered with Hello Kitty merchandise, an oversize disco ball, and a
stable of inflatable unicorns.
I mean, I love me some camp, but this was enough to make
Angelyne cringe. If “getting everything she could out of this place”
meant becoming a hoarder, than she was succeeding with flying colors
(many of which were shades of pink).
I noticed that she had a piece of paper taped over a vent on the
wall. “What’s that?” I asked.
Vicky looked over her shoulder.
“Oh, that?” she asked, pointing towards the vent.
I nodded.
“The girls who were in here last night put that up,” she nonchalantly explained. “They were up here smoking meth and it has this like,
really foul smell, like rotten eggs, so they covered up the vent.”
I nodded again, hoping the shock and amusement wasn’t readable
on my face.
“They knew if the smell made its way down to the butler’s pantry,
someone might figure it out and bust ’em,” she continued.
“Huh,” I said, going through a mental Rolodex of her girlfriends
to figure out which ones she was talking about.



“Speaking of the other girls . . .” Vicky began, a new focus in her
voice. “You know I can’t stand Dianna, right?”
“No, I didn’t,” I replied. How would I know who was on Vicky’s
list of enemies?
At the ripe old age of 29, Dianna was one of the oldest in this new
crop of girlfriends. She was beautiful, but there was something a little
off about her. She had wild, violent mood swings and looked more like
an attractive 40-something with a face full of Botox and fillers than a
29-year-old.
“Okay. Well, you know how when you do coke, there’s like a pile
in the center with some lines next to it for people to do?” She paused.
It took me a second to realize she was waiting on me to respond.
Quickly I nodded. I didn’t do it myself, but I’d been offered cocaine
countless times since moving in—it was definitely the drug of choice
among the girls of the mansion.
Apparently satisfied with my response, she continued: “Well, Dianna doesn’t do the lines . . . she does the whole fucking pile!” Her
eyes were wild as her arms flew in the air. “It’s like, bring your own
shit.”
I wondered if Vicky was high this very moment. It would explain
her spastic behavior and even why she invited me into her room in the
first place.
“You know Amanda, that new Playmate?” she asked, jumping to
the next subject without missing a beat.
I actually had an answer for this one!
“Yes!” I exclaimed. I’d only met Amanda a handful of times while
she was shooting her pictorial, but the wholesome dark-haired beauty
definitely left an impression. She possessed an air about her, like she
just walked off the pageant stage. I always noted her impeccable



manners—a rarity in the Playmate world. “I really like her. She’s so
pretty and seems really classy.”
“Well, she’s not!” Vicky whirled around with a huff. Apparently
that was the wrong answer, because Vicky unleashed her Amanda-focused tirade. “You know, don’t you ever wonder, for a girl to want to
pose nude, there has to be something wrong with her, right?”
I kept my mouth shut. Her eyes narrowed on me as she waited for
my response. It seemed like a loaded question, since both Vicky and I
were eager to become Playmates. I thought she might be getting to
some sort of point—perhaps whatever it was that motivated her to ask
me to her room in the first place.
“Well, she makes a lot of money,” Vicky finally said, her claws
momentarily retracted. “Like, thousands of dollars a night. Actually,
almost all of the Playmates make that kind of money.”
Vicky paused, waiting for me to take the bait and ask how they
made that kind of money. She took a seat on top of what appeared to
be a small mound of dirty clothes on the white couch and began casually petting the tiny dog that had crawled into her lap. After it was
clear I wasn’t biting, she continued her story on her own.
“Take Carrie, for example . . .” she continued, her eyes on the little
animal.
A recent Playmate, Carrie was a 21-year-old with a 16-year-old
face. She had striking green eyes, but no personality. I remembered
seeing her a few days earlier at the Fun in the Sun party droning on
about her swimsuit.
“Do these look like pumpkins,” she had asked Vicky, stretching
her orange-dotted Dior bikini over her chest.
Wow, I remembered thinking. Playmates must make some pretty
good money to be able to afford Dior bikinis.



“Well,” Vicky continued, snapping me back to the present, “she
has a lot of sugar daddies. One pays for her apartment, one pays her
bills, one takes her shopping . . .”
“No way!” I shouted, unintentionally cutting Vicky off. Rumors of
Playmates working for “high class” escort agencies had plagued Playboy for decades, but it wasn’t common knowledge and I’d never heard
of it firsthand before.
“Yeah,” Vicky said with a carefree laugh. “And everybody does it.”
And as casually as if she were inviting me to tea, she asked: “Do
you think it might be something you’d be interested in?”
“No way!” I said, almost laughing. Was she really asking me if I’d
consider becoming a hooker!? Sure, I’d made a bad decision moving
into the mansion, but I wasn’t down for full-on prostitution. She
wasn’t going to get me this time.
My eyes fell on Vicky and I quickly adjusted my expression. I
couldn’t be certain, but I was fairly sure our newly rekindled friendship would be short-lived. “Umm, I mean,” I sputtered, uselessly trying to recover, “that’s just not something I’m into.”
Her face was starting to morph from terribly offended to wildly
angry. I kept talking, hoping it would stave off the shit storm I just
walked into.
“I mean, it’s just a little much for me, there’s nothing special
about it,” I floundered, trying in vain to come up with anything that
might not piss Vicky off. I could feel the blood pumping in my cheeks,
certain I was bright red. Vicky had just opened the door to her secret
little world and I slammed it in her face.
“Okay, whatever,” she spat. “Hey, I need to get ready, so I’ll see
you later, okay?”
“Okay,” I said, recognizing that it was my cue to leave.
Oh my god, I thought, I can’t wait to tell Bridget about this!



I came to believe that Vicky was working for Hollywood madam
Michelle Braun (the owner and operator of the high-end escort service
Nici’s Girls). In the late 1990s and early 2000s, “Nici” was the premier
madam who prided herself on a reputation of having the most exclusive girls in the business—many of which were Playmates and even
some of Hef’s own girlfriends.
In a 2009 New York Post article, Braun boasted, “at one time,
seven of the eight girls living in the Mansion were working for me. I
had one of his girlfriends in the Mansion just to recruit for me.”
When I read this article, it was obvious to me that Vicky must
have been her recruiter. I compared notes with a few of the other girlfriends and found that they had also been approached by Vicky. One of
the girls said Vicky had confided in her that she got a cut or fee for the
girls she was able to introduce to Braun. Girls were routinely convinced that these men were willing to pay a premium for simply the
pleasure of their company and not necessarily for sex—but, from what
I understand, that was almost never the case. While I was at the mansion, there were a handful of girlfriends who refused the invitation to
hook (Bridget was never even approached), but I have no idea what
went on before I got there.
A few years ago, Braun’s client and employee list, circa 1999, surfaced on the Web (gossip site HollywoodInterrupted.com published
the documents). Among the many notable names were Hef’s former
girlfriends Mandy and Sandy Bentley, as well as his former main girlfriend Tina Jordan. (In 2009, Braun was indicted after pleading guilty
to transporting women across state lines for the purpose of prostitution and money laundering and was sentenced to three years’ probation and six months of house arrest.)
The women were tempted with the lavish life that a $1,000 weekly
allowance certainly wouldn’t provide for. They would travel all over



the world and make upwards of $25,000 to spend an evening with
whoever was willing to shell out the cash. Girls were making money
hand over fist! They became addicted to L.A.’s opulent lifestyle—expensive cars, designer handbags, luxury apartments—and sadly, for
many of these women, the majority of their income went to supporting
some pretty nasty drug habits.
At the end of the day, whatever their reasons for making this
choice, I never judged them—and I certainly don’t now. Vicky,
however, disgusts me. If she was indeed Michelle Braun’s recruiter,
then she preyed on the young, naïve women who tumbled into L.A.
with stars in their eyes, and used them for her own gain.
In 1997, ’80s Playmate Rebecca Ferratti made headlines when she
participated in an E! True Hollywood Story titled “The Sultan and the
Centerfold.” Ferratti recalled her spiral into the world of prostitution.
In her day, high-end call girls were being shipped off to Brunei to meet
their clients. In the early 2000s, Turkey was the hotspot for these L.A.bred escorts.
Braun said during a 2008 Rolling Stone interview that her big
break in the escort business was landing Turkish billionaire Hakan
Uzan as a Nici’s Girls client (the article named Playmate Tishara
Cousino and Playboy cover girl Ashley Massaro as employees, as well
as Tina). “Hakan would send me an instant message at 3 A.M., and I
would have to get four Playmates ready right away,” Braun told the
magazine. “The first flight to Istanbul was around 6 A.M. through Paris, and sometimes I’d wake them up in the middle of the night for that
flight.”
The madam was arrested in 2007 and revealed details about her
global hooking empire during the Rolling Stone interview, but Playboy—and Hef—had known about the racket for years. In fact, Hef even
launched his own private investigation into the matter in hopes of



shutting down Nici’s Girls and other agencies standing on the
shoulders of the Playboy name. The hypocrisy here is palpable. Considering Hef kept his own “harem” of sorts, it’s easy to see the mansion
as a gateway to hooking. But Hef was determined to plug this
leak—not necessarily for the benefit of the girls, I believe, but to maintain Playboy’s image. It wouldn’t look that good if a majority of Playmates graduated to sex for pay. Playboy was supposed to be “classy,”
after all.
Eventually, I learned more about the situation from Mary O’Connor, who had become a close friend. During my morning visits to her
office, I would hear about the goings-on and frequently come across
documents pertaining to the investigation. Instinctively, I grabbed a
stack of contact sheets off Mary’s desk, thinking it had to be negatives
from the newest Playmate test shoot—something I always pored over.
My heart sank when I saw what the images actually were. In the
photos was a red-faced, swollen-eyed Playmate, one that I knew well.
Wearing a hot pink wig, looking like she was drugged out of her brain,
posing nude for the unknown photographer, she was subjecting herself to the most repulsive and demeaning positions. She was showing
parts of her anatomy never even seen in the pages of Playboy; in fact
I’m not sure you’d even see some of this in Hustler. In her drug-fueled
state, she must have thought the hot pink wig would sufficiently mask
her identity . . . despite her face being very clearly on display.
Hef was determined to put an end to the Playboy prostitution
ring—still unaware he had an enemy under his own roof—and put new
restrictions in place to better ensure that his centerfolds weren’t participating in Nici’s Girls.
If he found out that one of his Playmates had been associated with
this ring, that person would be stripped of any Playmate responsibilities. (I don’t even think he considered that any of his girlfriends had



been participating.) As soon as word of these new restrictions started
circulating, it didn’t take long for girls to start panicking.
“Holly, I need your help,” the breathless caller squeaked through
the splotchy connection.
As 2002 was nearing its end, it was time for Hef to select Playmate of the Year. Amanda was in close contention with a handful of
other girls, and I was not so quietly rooting for the fresh-faced beauty.
I thought she was warmer and friendlier than most of the other candidates and would make a good representative for the magazine.
While Amanda and I had met a few times, we were by no means
close, so when one of the mansion butlers rang my room from the
pantry switchboard to tell me Amanda was on the line, I was
surprised.
“Sure, what do you need?” I said. I figured she wanted me to put
in a good word with Hef about her candidacy. People always thought I
had a lot more leverage than I did.
“I need you to talk to Hef,” Amanda begged, sounding desperate.
“They told me I was getting Playmate of the Year, but now they’re saying they aren’t going to give it to me.”
Immediately, my conversation with Vicky months earlier popped
into my head.
“Why?” I asked, hearing my own trepidation.
“They asked to see my passport,” she explained urgently. “And I
don’t have it.”
“Why do they want to see your passport?” I asked, already suspecting the answer.
“I don’t know,” she lied.
“Well, where is it?” I felt like I was interrogating her, but it was
clear she was trying to manipulate my position. If Hef knew she was a



prostitute, I couldn’t very well campaign for her as Playmate of the
Year.
“I left it at my mom’s in Washington,” she cried. I could hear the
panic in her voice. Her dreams were vanishing before her very eyes.
“Can’t she just FedEx it?” I said, offering the simplest solution.
She probably had her passport sitting in front of her as she spoke to
me, but I couldn’t let on what I suspected.
“No,” she said, offering no further explanation.
There was no place left for the conversation to go.
“I can try to talk to him, but he doesn’t always listen to me.” (Ever
listen to me, I thought.) “But if this is really important to you, you
should try to get your passport.”
“Thanks, Holly,” Amanda said, letting out a defeated sigh. “I know
you were supportive of me and I really appreciate it.”
I later discovered that in order to stop the prostitution problem,
Hef mandated that any Playmate found to be working as a call girl
would be banned from working any promotional appearances for the
magazine. (The same fate applied to girls who posed for competing
magazines such as Penthouse and Hustler, as these were much more
explicit, competing publications. Hef considered this a branding issue.) To serve as a message to future Playmates, that year’s Playmate
of the Year candidates had to submit their passports for review. They
were onto the Turkey connection, and if any girls had a stamp from
that country, they were taken out of contention (as were girls unwilling to hand over their passports, apparently).
While many Playmates continued working for Nici’s Girls (the
promotional pay from Playboy couldn’t compete with the escort business), I understand that Hef eventually decided to call off the investigation just as they had gotten close to a bust (no pun intended). Maybe
he knew he couldn’t do anything to control the former Playmates, but



hoped that word of the Playmate of the Year passport check had done
enough to scare the following year’s group of girls. Plus, Hef must have
wanted to avoid the story leaking to the press (as it eventually would).
At the end of the day, “Playboy Playmates Turn Prostitutes” still isn’t a
good headline for the brand.
But while Hef knew many of the Playmates were moonlighting as
call girls, he and his detectives were still completely oblivious to the
business Vicky was apparently conducting under his very nose with his
own girlfriends.
Why didn’t I tell Hef what I believed about Vicky? Because I knew
that if I told him that I thought Vicky had tried to recruit me to be an
escort, he would run and tell her verbatim what I said. She would of
course deny any involvement; Hef might choose to believe her, reprimand me for spreading catty gossip, and then I would be subjected
to Vicky’s vengeful wrath.
No, thank you.
Even after reports came out implicating Hef’s girlfriends in the
Nici’s Girls escort ring, I don’t know if he ever figured out who was
Braun’s inside girl. In the end, it was a different moneymaking scheme
that sealed Vicky’s fate.
Back in the early 2000s, invites to the mansion were still a prized
commodity, and there was a market of wealthy men willing to pay top
dollar for a spot on Playboy’s exclusive party guest list. As girlfriends,
it was understood that we could invite a few family members and
friends to attend each of the mansion’s decadent soirees. Ever the
hustler, Vicky saw this as the perfect opportunity to make some extra
cash. Like she said, she was going to milk this place for all that she
could.
For a small fortune, Vicky would secure eager partygoers a spot
on the coveted guest list under her own name (telling the office they



were cousins or close friends). And because greed seeped out of her
pores like sweat, she couldn’t help but recruit the other girlfriends to
do the same. Vicky would do all the heavy lifting (for a cut of the
profits, naturally) and all the girls had to do was give the names to the
office administrators before the party. I believe I was the only girlfriend she didn’t approach about this scheme. My reaction to her
hooking proposal must have turned her off.
Vicky’s greed became her own worst enemy. While it was in everyone’s best interest (the clients and the girls) to keep the escort ring as
discreet as possible, the Playboy guest list racket was less distasteful.
So, naturally, people talked . . . and word eventually found its way to
Hef.
A few days before the annual Playboy Halloween bash, I had come
down with a nasty case of the flu. I curled up in bed all day, barely able
to move a muscle or even lift my head off the pillow. Unbeknownst to
me, Hef had recently found out about Vicky’s guest list scam and confronted her. He was furious with Vicky and the “Mean Girls.” When
some of the names on the guest list aroused suspicion, the “paying
customers” were called by one of Hef’s secretaries, asking how they got
the invite. They simply told the secretary that they paid one of the girls
to get in. Amazingly, Vicky had neglected to tell them it was a secret.
Needless to say, they were totally busted and even Vicky couldn’t deny
it.
Of course the evil witch was convinced that somehow I had been
the one to snitch, even though I hadn’t even known about the scheme
at that point. Part of me wishes I could now take credit for what would
be her demise, but it was not my doing. None of that mattered, because regardless of what I did or didn’t do, Vicky was hell-bent on
making my life miserable.



“Honeeeeyyyyyyyyyyyy, weeee’rrrreeee hooooooommmmeeee!”
Vicky squealed through the doors of the master bedroom, dragging out
each word in a singsong childlike tone. Terrified they were going to get
kicked out, Vicky and the “Mean Girls” had all gone to a local tattoo
parlor to get bunny head logos inked on their ankles (an expression of
their undying devotion to Playboy and Hef).
“Honeeeeeyyyyyyyyyy,” she cooed again, only louder. Uninvited,
she flung open the doors and screeched like nails down a chalkboard,
“We have something to showwwwww yoooouuuuu.”
“He’s in the library,” I croaked from what felt like my deathbed.
“What?!” Vicky shouted, as if she was shocked I dare even speak
to her. Leaving the other girls in her wake, she charged up to my side
of the bed, her nostrils flaring like an enraged bull and her fists
clenched at her side.
She came on so aggressively I worried she might hit me. It wasn’t
out of the question. I’d seen some of the girlfriends resort to throwing
punches over things as trivial as someone cutting the bathroom line at
a nightclub, but I’d never seen Vicky so incensed before. I think mansion life was eating away at her: she had become desperate, paranoid,
and apparently volatile. Panicking, I felt my sore muscles tense, preparing for a blow.
“He’s in the library,” I croaked again, a bit softer, praying they
would all just leave.
“He’s in the LI-BRAAARY,” Vicky shrieked, raising her pitch in an
attempt, I assumed, to mock me. She was hovering over my quivering
body, her eyes crazed and a vicious smile creasing her puffed lips. I
stiffened, half preparing myself to run towards the door. I had no idea
what had set Vicky off this time.
“Fuck!” one of the other girls shouted, sounding similarly enraged. “Let’s go!”



Relief washed over me as Vicky turned around and began stomping away. Suddenly she spun around and at the top of her lungs
screamed, “FUCKING BITCH!” and slammed the heavy door so hard
the pictures on the walls shook as if an earthquake had rattled the
house.
What had just happened? I thought, adrenaline pumping through
my veins. I took a few slow, deep breaths to calm myself so that I could
process the encounter. I was so rattled that I lay in bed paralyzed by
fear, praying that Hef would quickly return.
It felt like hours before Hef finally returned to the bedroom. He
relayed the story to me about how he had caught the girls adding
names to the party guest list and how upset he had been at each of
them. For a moment, I felt relief.
Oh my god, I thought. He’s going to kick them out. They’re actually going to be gone.
But when he got to the part where they had gone to get their
bunny brands as a sign of loyalty and how very sorry they all seemed,
his eyes started to gleam with pride as a small smile spread across his
face. His voice was shaking in that way that it did whenever he told a
story that “touched” him.”
Are you fucking kidding me? I thought. He wasn’t actually falling for this . . . was he?
“You mean, you’re really not going to do anything?” I asked, my
raspy voice barely escaping my mouth.
“What do you mean?” Hef asked, truly befuddled. I could sense he
was shocked by my response. “They are genuinely sorry, Holly. They
said they didn’t mean to hurt me and are now more devoted than
ever.”
I didn’t say anything, but it was clear my silence spoke volumes,
so he continued.



“They said they’re going to put in a lot more time around here,” he
proudly stated. “They even expressed an interest in coming in and
watching movies with us at night. Do you know Dianna actually loves
black-and-white movies?”
I could feel the tears burning my eyes as I tried to hold them back.
Of course, I didn’t know Dianna liked old movies—because she didn’t!
All the “Mean Girls” rolled their eyes behind Hef’s back whenever he
made mention of his beloved black-and-white films. Hef and I usually
watched movies alone most weeknights, which for me was a muchneeded reprieve from having to be around all the other girls. Surely
the Mean Girls would have made good on their promises to Hef, not
only in order stay in his good graces, but also to drive me crazy with
their ever-obnoxious presence. There was no way I could tolerate any
more time around those girls than I already had to.
No, I thought. I won’t. I just couldn’t stay any longer.
“I can’t believe you aren’t going to do anything!” I cried, tears now
cascading down my cheeks. “I can’t stay here anymore! I can’t live in a
house with Vicky—someone who is that mean to me!”
Even though we never talked about it, Hef knew the girls were terrible to me. He just chose not to do anything about it.
“This is my house!” Hef screamed at me, his face red with anger.
“How dare you complain to me! I treat you like a princess!”
More like Rapunzel, I thought. I shifted my gaze downward and
refused to react to his tantrum, which luckily proved to be short-lived.
Hef calmed down just as quickly as he became upset.
“Well, I’m hesitant to get rid of Vicky, because other girls seem to
really like her,” he said thoughtfully, folding his hands in his lap. This
was code of course for her ability to recruit other girls into the bedroom. While he knew I was in the room, I wasn’t completely sure if he
was talking to me or just aloud, so I kept quiet.



As he sat there weighing his options, I felt defeated. Supposedly I
was the “love of his life,” as he liked to say, but he was weighing my
worth against Vicky’s. We sat in silence for a long while.
Maybe no one would recognize me as a former Playboy mistress,
I thought. That was it. I would leave the mansion for good, my bunny
tail tucked between my legs—and Vicky would win. Just as I was about
to pull myself from the haze I’d been living under, Hef broke the
silence.
“Well, you know,” he conceded, “I think Vicky was the ringleader
in this whole thing. She really was the one that led those girls astray.” I
held my breath as he surely pondered his poor little damsels being manipulated by her.
“I think I’ll tell her it’s time for her to leave after the Halloween
party,” he said matter-of-factly as he picked up the bedside telephone
to order his dinner.
I didn’t say a word. Even to express my gratitude might unintentionally change his mind. I just nodded as if the decision was an unemotional, practical one.
On the inside, I was bouncing off the walls with happiness. Vicky
was going to be kicked out! But on the outside, I had to remain calm
and unaffected. I knew the battle was over, but I was careful not to
rock the boat. That’s always how things were at the mansion: you were
constantly fighting just to stay afloat, to keep yourself from being
kicked out onto the street. Losing sight of what it was I had even
wanted before moving in, I became obsessed with being the last one
standing in this perverted elimination game . . . I was determined to
win.

CHAPTER 6

“I can’t explain myself, I’m afraid, Sir,” said Alice,
“because I’m not myself, you see.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

I

n just one year, I had gone from the newest member of Hef’s Party
Posse to the one with the most seniority. Tina, Vicky, April, Lisa, Candice, and Carolyn had all gone their separate ways. In their place was
an entirely new cast of characters: Bridget (my sole friend), Daphne (a
pretty, cunning girl who quickly became one of Hef’s favorites), Dianna (Hef adored her because she had the helpless “damsel in distress” act down pat), Elizabeth (one of Daphne’s sidekicks who was
low on the totem pole because Hef found her shrill and demanding),
Whitney (at 30, the oldest girlfriend and Hef’s least favorite because
he considered her “pushy”), and finally Amber (a seemingly sweet as
sugar, quiet girl who defected from side to side when it came to the
battle between the Mean Girls and me).
While the girls were different, some things never changed. With
the exception of Bridget, I was no more successful in making friends
with this group of girls than with the last. To make matters worse,
since none of these new girls were being given the Playmate pictorials



they so badly wanted, they therefore weren’t kept busy with photo
shoots, video shoots, and promotional appearances like the last batch
of girls had been. With all the extra time the new girls had to spend at
the mansion counting their frustrations, the claws were perpetually
out.
The Wednesday and Friday nightclub outings, which had seemed
so exciting to me when I first joined the group, became dreadfully
monotonous, not just to me, but to all of the girls. On Wednesdays, we
would go to Concord or the Standard Lounge, and on Fridays, we
would go to the upscale, but not star-studded, Barfly on Sunset
Boulevard. Since there were no celebrities to be seen at Barfly, the
girls hated it and referred to it as “Barf Fly” behind Hef’s back. Each
night out would begin with a limo ride to the nightclub, with Hef
passing out his “thigh opening” Quaaludes to the girls in attendance. I
still refused them, but many girls didn’t. The evening out would always
end with the girlfriends trying to convince Hef to go home a little earlier than usual. He usually insisted on staying out until 1 A.M., but on
the rare occasion he agreed to leave early, we all breathed a collective
sigh of relief. Daphne, Dianna, and Elizabeth would beg Hef to bring
us to cooler night spots instead of “Barf Fly,” but he was loath to
change his routine. Also, his cachet on the nightclub scene had subsided over the past year. He had been going out so often, he was no
longer a novelty, and he was too high maintenance (always bringing a
huge group and always demanding the best booth in the house) for the
A-list clubs to be bothered with him anymore.
The dreaded “bedroom routine” still went on after each club
night, but the parade of new girls joining the antics had subsided. In
fact, anytime a woman the girls found to be a potential threat got too
close to Hef, one of them (I was never sure who) would give her a
“friendly warning” that herpes was “going around the mansion” and



she would instantly back off. The rumor gained such momentum that I
was witness to two instances of girls (who had slept with Hef; one was
a former girlfriend, one was a weeklong fling) calling his office and
asking that he pay for their herpes medication. Even though he
grumbled about how he received a “full physical” every year, therefore
it couldn’t have been him that they got herpes from, he always ended
up paying for the medication. I suppose he did it to keep them quiet
and make them go away.
Daytime at the mansion was still as uneventful as ever. Looking
for something to occupy our time, Bridget and I became official mansion tour guides. The job required that we familiarize ourselves with
every fact about every nook and cranny of the 21,987-square-foot
house and the 5.3-acre property. We hosted the frequent morning
tours—mostly to servicemen and charity raffle winners—and we were
even given custom Bunny costumes made specifically for us, which
was a real treat considering that even Playmates weren’t allowed to
keep theirs. (While most people use the term “Playboy Bunny” to describe anyone associated with the magazine or Hef, the term actually
refers to the waitresses who wore the Bunny costumes at the Playboy
Clubs, which existed in the middle part of the last century. In the absence of these clubs, Playmates occasionally donned the costumes for
photo shoots or public appearances.)
I spent a lot of time in the mansion’s zoo, learning about the animals from the wonderful zoo staff. Hundreds of exotic birds and three
types of monkeys called the grounds home. I made friends with a large
spider monkey named Coco whom we eventually trained to be able to
walk around on a leash.
One day, as a favor to Hef, I decided to take on the project of “organizing” his bedroom. Even for someone with a lot of time on her
hands, it was a formidable task that ended up taking several days.



From the first time I’d ever seen the inside of his bedroom to my days
as his main girlfriend, Hef had managed to collect even more junk. A
recent Premiere magazine profile of Hef had referred to his room as
“the lair of the Playboy pack rat.”
One of his most prominent collections was his film library. At that
time, many of the films he had collected were still languishing in
stacks on his bedroom floor, in the form of ¾-inch tapes (which look
like larger versions of traditional VHS tapes, all in generic gray clamshell cases). My main order of business was carrying all the tapes upstairs and filing them in one of his many video closets so they could
await conversion to DVD by his “video staff” (who also operated as a
human TiVo, taping every television program he circled in the TV
Guide).
This ended up becoming quite the workout; I must have climbed
up and down those stairs more than 300 times carrying heavy stacks
of tapes. It was particularly unpleasant when I’d unearth a tape and
realize it was coated in years-old dog urine.
As the piles diminished, ornately carved walls I had never seen
(and which probably hadn’t seen the light of day in a decade) appeared. While it felt good to see the room come together, I must say I
found some things I would have rather not seen. Topping the list? An
old reel stashed away in a drawer full of porn labeled “Girl and Dog.”
It made me wonder if Hef had ever thought about who was going
to go through his things one day after he passed away. He was so fastidious about his public image and about having every moment in his
life documented and recorded in a way that showed his life the way he
wanted it shown.
I was disheartened to learn from one of his friends that he had
plans to donate his scrapbook collection to a library or university after
he passed, though he hadn’t settled on which one at that point. It was



such a personal and private collection, not just for him, but for anyone
who’d ever been in his life.
Hef holds the Guinness Book of World Records title for largest
scrapbook collection at over 2,000 volumes. He keeps them in his attic
along with desks and supplies for his scrapbook staff (yes, he has a
scrapbook staff) to paste everything together. Good or bad, anything
written about him goes in the scrapbook. Every picture his photographers take ends up in the scrapbook. Every girl he takes out is pictured in the photos, and the insinuation that they slept together is
there along with nude photos, in some cases. I’m sure many girls included in the scrapbooks wouldn’t be too thrilled to learn they could
be public property one day soon.
I know I wasn’t. Granted, there wasn’t anything scandalous about
me in the scrapbooks, but it was humiliating to think that anything
personal I had trusted him with could end up public property via their
inclusion there, even if it was just something trivial like a sad note I
had written to him. It was another thing that made me feel embarrassed, trapped, and forever branded.
In another attempt to occupy my time (and my brain), I began
taking French lessons, acting classes, and real estate investment
courses at UCLA. I needed to do something to stimulate my mind and
avoid permanent bimbo status. The stammer I had developed continued to creep into my speech, and I hoped that furthering my education
might somehow help. Bridget and I truly were kindred spirits. She had
already received her master’s degree, but felt the weight of mansion
life affecting her head, too, and began taking classes as well.
The classes were the only part of my day that didn’t in some way
revolve around impressing Hef or conforming to his rules. He couldn’t
have cared less about what I was learning. To him, a woman’s beauty



is her most powerful asset . . . unless of course she happens to be
famous.
Above all things, Hef is fascinated with fame (both his and other
people’s). He is obsessed with cataloguing his life as a public figure
and keeps records of every press interview he’s ever done. Celebrity is
one of the few things that can’t be bought—and Hef prides himself
greatly on his 60-plus years in the spotlight.
Whenever even the most Z-list celebrity would grace him with his
or her presence, Hef would drop everything to accommodate the
“star.” It made me feel so incredibly insignificant, and it was embarrassing to watch him act even cheesier and more fake than he usually
did. Hef never even bothered to introduce us to his guest—as if we
were some lifeless mannequins unworthy of such an “honor.”
While I had always dreamed of one day becoming an actress, it
wasn’t until I lived at the mansion that I began craving fame strictly
for fame’s sake. In some corner of my mind, I thought that maybe if I
became famous I would have some value. Perhaps I would earn Hef’s
respect after all. Maybe I could even score a pictorial in the magazine.
My life had become so backwards. I had once looked at a Playboy
pictorial as a stepping-stone to an acting career, but over the past few
years I had become so absorbed by Playboy that I started seeing fame
as a stepping-stone to a pictorial. I was completely coming undone.
“WE HAVE PINK PUSSIES!” a loud baby-voiced blonde shrieked, charging past security into our roped-off table at one of our regular night
spots.
Hef adored Paris Hilton. Before she became a household name
with her television show The Simple Life, Paris was a notorious



socialite who was regularly mentioned, along with her sister Nicky, in
Page Six.
With some sort of murky pink liquid (these shots were the “Pink
Pussies” Paris referred to) sloshing out the tops of three shot glasses,
Paris squeezed her way into our VIP section of the club. Like clockwork, Hef motioned for us to scoot down to make room next to him for
Paris. According to Hef, she was a “celebrity” (even though her meteoric rise to fame was still months away).
I took it upon myself to always take note when a celebrity would
make the effort to introduce him- or herself to us or even simply
blanket the group with a simple “Hi, girls!” Many of them ignored us
entirely and spoke to Hef as if he were the only person in the room.
Since Paris took the time to introduce herself, she fell into the “nice”
category.
It was the heyday of the club scene in Los Angeles, so we would
see Paris around semi-regularly. She’d always make a point to come
over and say hello to us—and each time Hef would just beam like a
perverted grandfather. At one point, I heard, she even began discussing the possibility of doing a pictorial with Playboy photo editor Marilyn Grabowski.
But a few weeks later, Paris, in the lowest low-rise jeans, the skimpiest blue top, and the darkest spray tan I had ever seen, appeared
tableside during one of our club nights at the Standard Lounge to
speak with Hef. I noticed she seemed more subdued than usual as she
leaned into his “good ear.” She appeared to be explaining something to
him. When she eventually walked away, Hef turned towards me and
said: “She can’t pose for the magazine because her mother said she
would disinherit her.” Whether that was true or if it was just an excuse
she made up in order to back out of the discussions, I don’t know.



Right before her new Fox reality show aired, Paris’s now infamous
sex tape surfaced, making her the most talked about woman on the
planet. 1 Night in Paris quickly became one of the bestselling porn
videos of all time. Posing nude for Playboy wouldn’t have been nearly
as controversial as her sex tape. What nude photos did for Marilyn
Monroe in the 1950s, sex tapes were now doing for 21st-century starlets. The Simple Life premiered to more than 13 million viewers.
I certainly wasn’t planning on ever making a sex tape, but any TV
appearances I could get—even it was just as “Bunny Number 2”—I
jumped on. Given our roles as mansion tour guides, Bridget and I were
often drafted to help play hostess when television shows came to film.
During a shoot for MTV’s Doggy Fizzle Televizzle, Bridget and I gave
Snoop Dogg the official tour. When MTV returned to shoot an episode
of Viva La Bam on the property, I was asked to be the Bunny who interacted with the cast. Desperate to swipe the spotlight away from me,
Daphne came to crash the shoot, but her spot ended up on the cutting
room floor. Shucks.
When MTV Cribs shot a Playboy Mansion episode, only one girlfriend could fit in the doorway alongside Hef for the opening
shot—and since I was his main girlfriend, I got the part. The crew took
a liking to me and asked that I lead them along on the tour. (One of
the other girls in particular tried shoving her face on camera as much
as she could. She was green with envy that I was getting this opportunity and rolled her eyes whenever they asked me to say something on
film.)
Rarely would a request come through to shoot all the girlfriends
together, but before the holidays one year, a Los Angeles news station
asked to film a segment with all the girls in our pajamas in front of the
mansion’s Christmas tree. Hef insisted we each wear the same matching oversize flannel pajamas he kept in bulk in his closet, but I decided



to wear my own slim-fitting pajamas with red Playboy Bunny heads
printed on them. Hef was extremely offended and demanded that I
march back upstairs and put on the de rigueur pink flannels. Was I
one of his children?
I refused. I hated having to conform, especially to this group of
girls. I also found his baggy, faded flannel pajamas terribly unflattering. I wasn’t granted permission to wear my outfit of choice without
yet another argument complete with flowing tears from Hef. (He later
apologized for being so upset after he saw the other girls pile around
the tree with deliberate markers of their own: a yellow duck beanie, a
Pomeranian puppy, etc. I wasn’t the only one desperate to stand out.)
Those TV spots were fun, but I was really excited when Fox started shooting a reality television show called Who Wants to Be a Playboy Centerfold? (The show was intended to be a series, but ended up
getting cut down into just a one-time special.) I thought this could be a
chance for me to learn more about the behind-the-scenes operations
of television, and who knows, maybe even get discovered myself. The
show was shot mainly in a ranch-style home across the street from the
mansion that Hef had recently purchased, which we would later take
to calling “The Bunny House.” Twelve contestants vying for a chance
at a Playboy centerfold were moved into the house, three or four girls
to a room. The girls would participate in several photo shoot challenges as they were eliminated one by one. Finally, a winner would be
chosen to be Miss July of that year.
Much to my dismay, Hef deliberately kept his girlfriends far, far
away from the production. Desperately bored with my day-to-day life,
I became obsessed with learning every behind-the-scenes detail about
this television special. I even snuck into the living room during a production meeting to listen in as Hef clandestinely discussed the next
round of contestant eliminations with the producers. I casually



flopped down into a pile of pillows in the corner of the room so I could
secretly hear their conversation.
“We have to keep her! She’s the bitch!” a female producer exclaimed after Hef pointed out who he would like to eliminate next.
“She makes great television!”
“I dunno, I think she’s a little overweight,” Hef grumbled.
“She’s right, we need to keep her,” an enthusiastic male voice
chimed in. “She’s confrontational with the other girls in the house. She
adds conflict.”
“Okay, well, we’ll keep her for the next round and see how it
works out,” Hef slowly acquiesced.
Wow, I thought. I was familiar with America’s Next Top Model,
the show that this Playmate competition show appeared to be based
on, and never would have guessed that contestants were kept on
strictly to stir the pot. It made sense, but in the early days of reality
TV, viewers weren’t as wise to the process as they are now.
Interestingly enough, the girl Hef had deemed “overweight” became a favorite of a Playboy photo editor, and her centerfold was so
well produced, Hef ended up selecting it as the winner. Since viewers
wouldn’t be happy with an antagonist winning the competition, the
show was quickly re-edited to take out those “pot-stirring bitch” moments and make the winner look like America’s Sweetheart. (By the
way, I always found the winner to be a nice person. I suppose she was
a little more honest and blunt than the rest of the contestants, hence
the “bitch” label that people like to throw onto assertive women.)
Anything is possible, I thought. Maybe Hef will one day change
his mind about my chances of being a centerfold, too.
The television special was just the latest in a slew of media opportunities Hef had begun participating in over the past few years. Two of
the most substantial, documentaries titled Playboy: The Party



Continues (2000) and Inside the Playboy Mansion (filmed before my
arrival in 2001), followed Hef’s new life as a 70-something swinger.
Any time a Playboy-related program aired, it scored fantastic ratings.
Middle America was still buying into the intrigue and racy glamour of
the Playboy world, made interesting again by Hef’s reemergence onto
the social scene.
Hef loved the documentaries that covered his life, but he also
loved any chance to cross over to a younger audience (he was obsessed
with appearing “hip” and relevant), which is how we found ourselves
doing press in the middle of a Justin Timberlake video shoot in the
mansion’s backyard.
“So, do you listen to hip-hop?” the MTV reporter asked.
“Uhhh,” Hef began, seemingly at a loss for words. “Ummm . . .”
In early 2003, Justin Timberlake was at the top of his game. You
couldn’t spend more than 10 minutes at any nightclub in Los Angeles
before hearing a track from his latest album Justified (so much so that
I still can’t listen to a single song without being overcome by painful
memories). When a request came through Playboy asking to shoot a
music video at the mansion for the Nelly track “Work It” featuring
Justin Timberlake, the answer was of course yes.
When it came time to shoot the video, the director offered Hef
and his girlfriends small roles. Because some of the other models in
the video were topless, it was deemed too racy for the United States
and only aired internationally. During the shoot, Hef sat in his own
wooden throne-like chair bobbing along to the beat and wearing black
sunglasses, with Nelly and Justin Timberlake on either side of him,
while we danced around them in skimpy outfits. After filming
wrapped, Hef was asked to do an interview with MTV news. All the
girlfriends gathered around Hef, and I took my place at his immediate
right.



“Uhhh,” Hef continued to fumble. This nonresponse was completely out of the ordinary. Usually he was a pro at these interviews,
able to call upon a laundry list of canned responses to just about any
question you can imagine. I listened to Hef rattle off the same answers
he’d given a million times before, often word for word. I think I had
unintentionally memorized some of them myself. He struggled for so
long, it was becoming awkward and I feared the reporter had only
asked about hip-hop to trip up the 76-year-old man, so I decided to cut
in.
“You listen to it out at the clubs,” I offered, looking at Hef with a
warm smile, aware that all eyes were on me.
“Er, um, yes, yes,” Hef said, regaining some composure. “We
listen to it when we go out.” He coasted through the rest of the interview on his Rolodex of previously used responses and we wrapped.
When I finally managed to get up to the master bedroom to
change out of the red skirt and lace cropped halter I had worn for the
video, Hef had beaten me there and was already standing in front of
the bathroom sink.
“YOU,” he began loudly when I appeared in the doorway, “have
NO answers! You are to keep quiet during interviews!”
“Sorry, I was just trying to help,” I mumbled as I darted around
the corner into the vanity. My eyes started filling with tears—as they
did almost daily back then.
I was to keep quiet, I repeated in my head. He was treating me
like a dog. Sit! Stay! No barking! Only I’d never seen him be so mean
towards his animals. I had tried to help my boyfriend navigate a sticky
situation and now I was being punished for it, which made the reprimand hurt all the more. Despite his many abuses, I had grown protective of Hef and felt like the interviewer could easily have made him look
like a fool. In the few years I’d been at the mansion, I’d never seen a



question throw him so entirely off his game. What if the producers decided not to be kind that day? The way he was sputtering in front of
the camera, they could have easily made him look like a senile old
coot.
But he clearly would rather have looked like an idiot than get help
from one of his “dumb blondes.”
When would I ever catch a break? I wondered.
FOR THE MAGAZINE’S 50TH anniversary, A&E wanted to shoot a TV special to air on the network. The program included a party at the mansion celebrating the magazine’s iconic run and honoring Playboy’s
most famous Playmates. As girlfriends, we had no role beyond getting
glammed up and sitting quietly next to Hef, but I used it as an opportunity to try to give myself a much-needed boost of self-esteem. I decided to treat myself to something really special: a red, Jessica Rabbit–inspired Baracci gown that cost a few thousand dollars. I never
spent that much on clothing, since I was trying to put away as much
money as I could, but I felt I finally deserved the treat. I always remembered how stunning the Bentley twins looked in their glamorous
Baracci gowns, and seeing as though this was an extra-special event, I
figured I could splurge!
“You know, you will look back on this time as the best time of
your life,” Mary had said to me after one of my vent sessions. “All the
dressing up and things you get to do.” I trusted Mary and always told
her how I felt, but if this is the best time of my life, shoot me now, I
thought.
Foolishly, I’d long believed that becoming a Playboy centerfold
was the fast track to fame and fortune. Boy, was I wrong. There have
been more than 720 Playmates in Playboy’s history. How many of



them can you name? Even if I did happen to score a pictorial someday,
it didn’t necessarily mean anything beyond validation. More than ever,
I had begun to accept that I would never achieve anything greater than
my role as “Hef’s main girlfriend.”
The handful of Playmates who had become famous were all in attendance that night. Playmate and TV personality Jenny McCarthy
hosted the event (her beauty is matched by her wit—she ended up being the best part of the show, by far!), which included musical numbers and stand-up acts. Nineties Playmate stars Anna Nicole Smith
and Pamela Anderson were also in attendance.
Barbi Benton, Hef’s main girlfriend in the ’60s and ’70s, attended
the soiree. While not technically a Playmate, Barbi was featured in
several pictorials and on four Playboy covers. Hef went out of his way
to keep in touch with many of his ex-girlfriends—partly out of sentimentality but also, I believe, as a form of damage control. Keeping in
the good graces of his ex-girlfriends was a sort of insurance policy. I
guess he figured the regular invites back to the mansion would keep
anyone from speaking negatively about him.
Barbi would end up becoming a regular guest star on The Girls
Next Door, and I ended up really liking her. She was quirky, friendly,
and creative. Barbi wasn’t a close confidant, though. Despite having
dated the same man, we couldn’t really relate on that subject. Sure,
Hef was much older than she was when they dated—old enough to be
her father, though, not her grandfather. Plus, Barbi didn’t have to
share Hef publicly. He wasn’t faithful to her by any means, but she
could at least pretend the other women didn’t exist. Never was she
forced to one side or the other to make room for a gaggle of giggling
blondes to line up around him.
It was a surprise to me how mannered and reserved many of the
former Playmates were. Despite presenting Hef with a birthday cake



totally nude while filming an episode of Girls Next Door, Pam Anderson always struck me as incredibly guarded and quite shy. Spending a
decade being chased by paparazzi must have made her cautious
around people. Like Pam, Anna Nicole was surprisingly quiet and very
polite. I met the towering blonde only briefly, but she exuded the
charm and etiquette of a real southern belle. Like most former Playmates, they were cordial with Hef, but I don’t believe they knew him
very well. During the Pam/Anna Nicole era, he was married to Kimberley and didn’t socialize with the Playmates much (if at all). Needless to say, those Playmates didn’t have to endure the Playboy “casting
couch” that existed after the end of his marriage.
I was beyond thrilled to meet 1950s pinup Bettie Page—a living legend! While her hair had long ago turned gray, she still wore it neatly
styled with those short iconic bangs. In her later years, Bettie became
a born-again Christian and conducted herself like the gentle,
churchgoing lady she was. Her name and likeness had become popular
again in the ’90s, and it was Hef and his friend Mark Roesler who
found Bettie and reconnected her with the business end of her pinup
past. As a small memento, I gave Bettie a “Miss January” necklace to
commemorate her January 1955 centerfold. She later told me she
hung it on her wall so she could always “look at it.” When she passed
away in 2008, I was heartbroken but grateful that we were able to
have met.
Despite the odds, a part of me still held on to my dream of one
day becoming a famous Playboy Playmate. And after meeting these
iconic women that night, I felt like I should at least try to make my
dream come true!
“Do you think I could ever be a Playmate?” I squeaked nervously
to Hef, my voice coming out even higher pitched than usual.
I held my breath.



After living at the mansion for quite some time, I finally got up
the nerve to ask about the possibility point-blank. I spit the question
out one evening while he was reviewing Playmate videos in his room.
“I knew you would eventually ask that,” he replied solemnly, his
eyes still focused on the video. Finally he let out a sigh and said, “I
don’t think so, Holly. There are a lot of blondes scheduled for upcoming months already.”
A massive lump formed in my throat. Okay, I thought, fighting
back the tears. I can take that. It seemed reasonable: too many
blondes.
“Besides,” he continued, now looking directly at me. “You don’t
have the look. You just don’t photograph well.”
“Oh,” I said slowly, careful to keep my voice from quivering.
“Right.” I’d always felt that Hef didn’t think I was very pretty and that
he thought I was lucky to be living at the mansion. But hearing him
basically say that hurt even worse than I could have imagined. I had
prepared myself for a negative response, but I had thought he would
have been more tactful. Luckily, his eyes remained riveted on the TV
screens, so I could wipe away my tears discreetly.
“I’d let you shoot for ‘Cyber Girl,’ though,” he offered, as if it were
some kind of consolation prize. Playboy.com featured a new “Cyber
Girl” each week—these were usually just photos pulled from the rejected Playmate test shoots. It was a throwaway offer. He knew it; I knew
it, and I wasn’t interested in being one of the many girls haphazardly
tossed online without ceremony. If I was going to take the leap and
pose nude for the world to see, I wanted to become Playmate of the
Month.
But then I thought, maybe posing for a “Cyber Girl” shoot would
show Hef that he was wrong about me. Perhaps the photos would actually turn out good enough that he’d have to reconsider me for



Playmate. On the other hand, if the photos were a total disaster,
maybe all those flaws that he saw in me were real and I’d finally be
forced to face them dead-on. Was I so hideous that I couldn’t be a
Playmate?
“OKAY, OPEN YOUR KNEES a little wider,” directed the photographer, as I
sat facing the camera on a red sofa without a stitch of clothing on my
body.
The shoot took place at the Bunny House—the brightly colored
midcentury home right across the street from the mansion. Naturally,
I was a bit anxious, but Sarah the makeup artist (who has since become a good friend) made me feel at ease. The photographers were
tired of the heavy-handed, ’90s-style makeup Hef still liked on Playmates. Since this was not a Playmate shoot, they took the opportunity
to use a more natural style, which I ended up liking.
When the stylists wheeled in the wardrobe options on a metal
clothing rack, my stomach tied itself in knots. As Hef’s main girlfriend,
they wanted me in a short satin kimono robe touting a plastic prop
pipe (say that three times fast!) to pay homage to my boyfriend (the
Hef tribute had been done once before by his second wife, Kimberley,
and would be done again by his third wife, Crystal). The remaining selections felt more downscale stripper than the old Hollywood glamour
style that I would have preferred.
“Can’t you see too much?” I asked timidly. This was Playboy, I
thought. Not Hustler.
“No, you can’t see anything from this angle if you lean forward,”
the photographer reassured. “I swear.”
The photographer assigned wasn’t one of the two used to shoot
the Playmate pictorials, and I was worried that I was wasting my time.



Since I wasn’t getting the opportunity to shoot with the best of the
best, I was terrified that my photos weren’t going to be the home run I
had hoped they would be. Despite what my gut was telling me, I continued with the shoot. I didn’t want to seem ungrateful or bratty.
“How did the shoot go?” Hef asked when I appeared in the master
bedroom. After a long day (which included a car wash scene, in February) I was cold and exhausted and wanted nothing more than to
shower and crawl into my pajamas.
“I’m not sure,” I answered honestly. “I don’t know if I’ll like the
photos.”
When the slides came back (Playboy was still shooting on film in
2003), I hated them. As I predicted, they were far more explicit than I
wanted them to be. I felt like a fool for listening to that photographer.
Adding insult to injury, the slides were accompanied by a memo
from Playboy’s Chicago photo editor, saying something to the effect
of: “Hef, do you want us to use these? They look like they were shot in
your room with her wearing your robe and smoking your pipe.”
The comment made it sound like I was some interloper sneaking
around the Playboy Mansion taking photos without permission. Was
the editor not aware that I was Hef’s girlfriend? I felt so embarrassed.
Usually, Hef made such a public fuss over whoever his main girlfriend
was—I felt like I was the first one he neglected to do that with. It made
me feel like I was not beautiful or glamorous enough to merit such
praise. In hindsight, I know he was just sick of the high turnover with
his past girlfriends. They were lasting, on average, about six months,
and he was done floating any girl’s ego. He had come to the conclusion
that if he kept us broken and needy, we would stay.
Broken and needy were definitely two adjectives that perfectly described me during that time. After about a year of stubbornly trying to
maintain some semblance of individuality, I finally gave up on my



short hair and started wearing clip-in extensions to give me the long
hair Hef preferred. I was feeling more disconnected than ever from the
goals I once had; mansion life had eaten away at my self-esteem. I
found myself constantly trying to compete with the other girlfriends
who were all caught up in who was prettiest. It was a perpetual contest
to see who could be the skinniest, tannest, bustiest, most baby-faced
with the longest, whitest hair.
We were all striving to win. We were trying so hard to stand out
and be coined the “hottest” of Hef’s harem that we completely missed
the fact that we were making ourselves indistinguishable from one
another.
After thinking about it for a few days, I finally worked up the
courage to ask Hef to scrap my Cyber Girl shoot. With a huge knot in
my stomach I explained that I wasn’t really comfortable with the results and would rather the photos weren’t floating around the Internet.
He assured me that he would let the Chicago office know—and he did,
but only after the pictures had already been posted on Playboy.com for
a few hours. The editor took them down immediately, but that doesn’t
mean much. Once something appears on the Internet, it never really
goes away. To this day, those photos are probably floating around
somewhere.
Oh well, I thought. I guess there could be worse things out there.
WHILE I WAS RACKING up disappointment after disappointment in the
pursuit of a career, my “social life” at the mansion wasn’t faring any
better.
Most of the other girlfriends seemed to hate me with a passion,
though I never did anything to them besides keep my distance.
Daphne was the alpha female of that group and the other girls



followed her like sheep. It didn’t take a genius to figure out that
Daphne would have loved to install Dianna in my place as main girlfriend. They felt my role as main girlfriend was to be a sort of representative for the other girls and make sure that we continued to enjoy
all the perks of living at the mansion. Under their breath, when they
weren’t making comments about my appearance (Daphne loved to
make fun of my “thin lips” since I was one of the few who didn’t have
my pout inflated with fillers), I’d overhear them make comments alluding to the fact that I didn’t “run things” as well as Tina, since Hef
had so noticeably tightened his purse strings with the girlfriends in the
last few years.
The majority of the women who had done time at the mansion
were born hustlers who knew how to milk a man for every last cent.
That ability to manipulate just wasn’t a part of my DNA. I was way too
timid, and besides, I actually liked Hef. I wasn’t interested in scamming every penny I could get out of him! Prior to me, Hef’s girlfriends
were masters of the hustle.
The Bentley twins were showered in lavish gifts: Rolex watches,
fur coats, matching BMWs, designer gowns, and even furniture for
their off-property apartments (which were also paid for by Hef). When
the twins (along with Brande Roderick) moved out, the original seven
moved in and Hef decided to tighten up the purse strings. Still, Tina
was skillfully calculating and was able to secure each girlfriend a
leased car, a sizable wardrobe allowance, and lavish Christmas gifts.
But it was nothing on the scale of what the twins had managed to
bank.
When Tina left the mansion, Hef tightened his belt even further:
no shopping sprees, less allowance, and off-site apartments were now
strictly forbidden.



Anyone who joined the Playboy harem was after something. Most
of the girlfriends were looking to get their pictorial and as much cash
as humanly possible, like hookers on the clock. While I wasn’t after
Hef’s money (I was just grateful to have a roof over my head!), I too
saw my stay at the mansion as a once-in-a-lifetime sort of thing that
could lead to potential opportunities for my future.
“I don’t care about money, I just want to be wonderful,” was a
Marilyn Monroe quote I lived by. I wasn’t looking to get rich, but I was
hungry for a career. I just wanted to accomplish something . . . anything! Sure, I believed I had come to care for Hef, but let’s get real: it
wasn’t love at first sight and I had my own set of goals. Greed just
wasn’t part of it.
During a trip to New York City for Playboy’s 50th Anniversary
Party (one of many anniversary parties that would be held that year),
Bridget, Amber, and I were excited to spend a few days touring the city
in style! While Hef busied himself with press interviews, we spent time
visiting Central Park, ice-skating in Rockefeller Center, eating New
York–style pizza, and jumping on the giant keyboard at the FAO Schwarz on Fifth Avenue.
As required, we invited the Mean Girls to join us, but they
couldn’t be bothered. Instead, they ran off to Bergdorf’s and purchased
three incredibly expensive designer handbags. Though Hef threw a fit
about the purchase, he let them keep the bags.
While Bridget, Amber, and I were focused on the experiences and
actually liked some things about Hef and his lifestyle, the Mean Girls
seemed to be focused only on the money. It felt like each side thought
the other side prevented them from getting what they wanted. Knowing damn well what the previous roster of girls had been given, it
seemed the girlfriends decided I was the reason their pockets weren’t



lined with cash and jewelry and decided to take matters into their own
hands.
“Holly, Hef would like to see you in his office,” the secretary said
through the phone line. The Mean Girls made sure I was routinely
called down to the principal’s office, so to speak.
What was it this time? I thought. One girl in particular loved to
whip up fictional stories about how I had supposedly wronged her.
Any time she would get heat from Hef for not following his rules to a T
(this happened constantly with most of the girlfriends), she loved to
deflect attention from herself by making something up about me.
Every time she made a mistake, it was somehow my fault, though we
had virtually nothing to do with each other. It was all bullshit. Hef saw
through her. After all, she wasn’t that clever, but he loved playing the
game too much to call her out on her lies. Being able to hold her stories over my head was just another tool Hef used to manipulate me.
Watching me get upset and squirm was just another way he satisfied
his perversions.
Every year since I had moved into the mansion, I made a trip to
Disneyland for my birthday. I expected all of the girlfriends to attend—simply because girlfriends were required to attend all planned
events on Hef’s schedule—but only Bridget, Amber, and my friend
Britney showed up. The message was received loud and clear: I was
being boycotted. They were trying to convince Hef that things would
be better if I weren’t around, because, after all, he was constantly saying that he just wanted “harmony” among the girls.
I don’t believe that he really wanted harmony—not for a single
minute. He thrived on catty drama among the women. Nothing made
him feel more important than a bunch of girls “fighting over him.” At
the time, though, we were all naïve enough to believe what he told us.



Unfortunately for the Mean Girls, their Disneyland boycott backfired. Not only did it make them look like pouty little children, which
Hef hated, but it also allowed me to have the most enjoyable birthday
celebration I’d had in a while!
They wouldn’t give up that easily, though.
In an attempt to further drive their point home, they had all gone
out to the Santa Monica Pier together and had a group caricature done
for Hef as a gift.
“Knock, knock!” one of the girls squealed loudly through the master bedroom door. Hef and I were sitting in bed eating dinner and
watching the news, as we usually did on weeknights, when the Mean
Girls came in to present him with the gift. As he fawned and cooed
over the picture, I noticed the girls exchange a few sly glances and
smirks. It was as if they were saying: “See how great we all look . . .
without Holly and Bridget.”
If Bridget or I had chosen to get a gift for Hef without including
the other girlfriends, we would have been reprimanded for not including everyone. Yet no one—Hef included—acknowledged my presence
in the room or my glaring omission from the drawing. It was as if I
were a ghost.
What Daphne and Dianna didn’t realize is that they’d never be
able to push Bridget and me out as long as they were still aligned with
Elizabeth and Whitney. Shrill Elizabeth and “pushy” Whitney were
never Hef’s cup of tea. I heard he turned each of them down the first
time they had asked to move in, but eventually he kept them around as
filler—so he could reach the “seven girlfriends” quota that had become
his trademark. (Over the previous year or so, since his girlfriends
hadn’t been gracing the pages of the magazine as often as they once
did, the number of girls clamoring to be included in his “party posse”
had understandably subsided.)



Whitney had always been Hef’s least favorite—in part because she
came into the group under some unsavory circumstances.
“Hef, do you think Whitney could start getting an allowance?”
Tina had asked. Despite having left the mansion months earlier, Tina
still trotted around from time to time to see what she could squeeze
out of Hef. “She works really hard to get all dressed up for you and to
come to all the events. She’d make a really great girlfriend.”
At the time, Whitney was good enough to join him in the bedroom, but he wasn’t too keen on asking her to move in. Tina had
clearly been recruited to go to bat for her.
“Actually, Tina, I’m hoping that with this next set of girls, expectations won’t be so high,” Hef explained to his former girlfriend. “Do you
know I spent two million dollars just on girlfriends and trips in the
past few years?” (Most of that went towards the private planes he
chartered, sometimes on the company tab, and the trips he took his
girlfriends on—including a lavish European tour before I had arrived.)
“She’s putting in all this time and all she’s getting out of it is a
drink and a fuck!” Tina said, clearly frustrated that she wasn’t getting
her way. Like I said, this girl was a hustler.
God, I thought. I could never get away with talking to Hef like
that.
The room got very silent as Hef sat staring at Tina.
“I like to think of this as all of their dreams coming true,” he said
very solemnly. Even Tina was struck silent by how serious he was. Did
he really mean what he was saying? It sounded so conceited to assume
that simply being in his presence (or bedroom) was a “dream come
true” for these women. The “hurt” expression he held on his face
forced Tina to abort her mission.



“Okay, sorry,” Tina offered and leaned over to give him a peck on
the mouth. As she walked out the door, she called out a thoughtless
“Love you!”
For months Hef continued to reject Whitney’s pleas to become a
girlfriend, but eventually her persistence paid off and one day she
moved into the mansion. We quickly discovered she was a pathological
liar—and it was actually pretty amusing. Her age, former professions,
and life story changed daily.
“Darlin’?” Hef asked, appearing in my dressing area one
afternoon.
“Yes?” I asked, pulling my nose out of my French homework.
“I need to talk to you about something,” he said, his brows furrowed, and pulled up my vanity stool. His somber eyes connected with
mine. “Did you drug Whitney’s drink last night?”
“No!” I exclaimed through a fit of laughter. “Are you serious? Did
she really say that?”
The night before we’d gone to the Saddle Ranch on Sunset
Boulevard for dinner. Whitney had quite a few cocktails and decided
to ride the mechanical bull. While no one really thought twice about it,
she was apparently mortified by the decision and desperately searched
for a reason to excuse her behavior.
“Yes,” he said. “She feels silly about last night and says she would
never have done it normally and believes you and Bridget drugged her
drink.”
The smile disappeared off my face as I realized that he was taking
her insane accusations seriously.
Bridget and I were so square we wouldn’t even have known how
to get drugs, let alone be tricky enough to slip them into someone’s
drink unnoticed. In front of a whole table full of enemies, no less. I
made this immediately clear to Hef.



Come on, Whitney, I thought. At least go for something somewhat believable.
“That’s what I figured,” Hef said, a smile slowly cracking on his
face. “But you know, I just had to be fair and ask.”
Phew. Luckily for me, it was Whitney making the allegations. I
don’t think things would have gone so smoothly if his beloved Dianna
or Daphne had made the claims.
Why can’t Hef see how awful they are? I wondered.
I started questioning who would last the longest: me or the Mean
Girls? I wasn’t sure how much more of the absurdity I could take.
After more than two and a half years at the mansion, I felt no more
surefooted than I had on the day I arrived. I felt like I was constantly
walking on eggshells, trying not to set off a land mine of drama each
day.
At the time, I had no idea that their days were numbered. But I
wouldn’t be the one who took them out. It would take someone else to
get rid of them. Someone a little bit more Hef’s type than I was:
someone younger, blonder, and much, much ditsier.

CHAPTER 7

Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask
help of anyone.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

I

t was April 2004 and the air had grown stale at the mansion. Bridget and I were constantly at odds with the other girlfriends. I could
sense that even Hef felt he was ready for a change. It was only a matter
of time before Hef started spring-cleaning and invited in a new
girlfriend.
And just who would it be?
Please be someone nice, I prayed.
As you might imagine, Hef is both meticulous and exceptionally
picky when it comes to his women: girlfriends, Playmates, etc. He has
a picture of every girl that’s ever come to the mansion—mostly Polaroids. If you were visiting the compound for the first time, a designated
staffer would snap a photo of you before you entered the party (as they
did to me years earlier), and those Polaroids were compiled for Hef to
review the next day. He would label them A, B, or C (based primarily
on their looks but also on how scantily clad they were) before having
them catalogued in his social secretary’s office.



The A category was the most elite—meaning those girls were allowed to be invited back for all events or perhaps even a Playmate test
or an evening out with Hef. The B category was reserved for girls Hef
would be comfortable inviting back for larger mansion parties (like
Midsummer Night’s Dream) as well as some of the smaller Fun in the
Sun pool parties. The C category was the label bestowed on girls that
were to be invited back only if they were absolutely desperate for more
warm bodies.
Whether it’s for his scrapbooks, his parties, or his magazines, Hef
is obsessive about photos. When I lived there, he still reviewed most of
the magazine submissions himself—and always gave his final sign-off
on an issue. He also felt it necessary to see pictures of every model that
would be working one of his parties.
Inside his room there was a calendar of upcoming events, and
next to it was a wooden box. Inside the box were photos of Playmates
and potential Playmates attached to a notecard with the girl’s information printed on it. This was a distinctive pile, because these were the
girls Hef was considering inviting out for a night. Occasionally there
would be a pile in front of the box with photos of girls that had attended a mansion party or girls that had submitted photos to the
magazine and weren’t being considered as Playmates, but were still
cute enough for Hef to consider taking out. For so long, this box was
my nemesis, as I dreaded possible new additions to the harem. This
time, however, I was determined to finally use the box to my
advantage.
Bridget and I were beyond tired of the Mean Girls, but we knew
Hef wouldn’t be content with just the two of us. We just got along too
well for his taste. How could Mr. Drama King feel fought over,
coveted, or interesting if his girlfriends actually got along? I knew Hef
felt he needed to be seen with a gaggle of women in order to keep up



his macho Playboy image, and since he viewed Bridget and me as virtually the same person, I knew a new girlfriend would have to move in
in order for us to have a chance at getting rid of the others.
The Mean Girls had already checked out, mentally. Daphne, Dianna, and Elizabeth had been at the mansion for more than two
years—and by this point probably assumed they’d never be offered a
pictorial. They each began focusing more on their lives outside the
gates (aka other boyfriends, in some cases), so it was only a matter of
time before they moved out or Hef asked them to leave. But even that
wasn’t soon enough. Bridget and I knew that if we wanted any sort of
influence in kicking these girls to the curb and figuring out who their
replacements would be, we’d have to act quickly.
A few days before Hef’s 78th birthday party, I noticed three pictures stacked in front of the wooden box in Hef’s closet. I grabbed the
photos and info sheets to scope out our options: Tiffany, Nicole, and
Kendra. Apparently, the girls were auditioning to be “Painted Ladies”
at the party, and the body paint artist had submitted the images to the
mansion for approval. The photos eventually made their way to Hef’s
private “consideration” pile, which meant he would definitely be keeping his eye out for them at the party.
The day of Hef’s soiree, Bridget and I went downstairs to the gym
to meet the “Painted Ladies” as they got ready (it took most of the day
for these girls to get covered head to toe in body paint). All three girls
seemed nice enough, but Bridget and I decided that Tiffany was our favorite. She was easy to talk to and seemed really smart—plus, she had
a knockout smile, long ash blond curls, and a gorgeous naturally curvy
body. More than hot enough to be Hef’s girlfriend, but a refreshing
change from the bleached-blond Fembot look.



Unbeknownst to us at the time, Hef had also made a pilgrimage
down to the gym to check out the prospects and made a beeline toward
Kendra Wilkinson—the most platinum and plastic of the bunch.
Preparing for a mansion party took an entire day. The large
parties were the highlights of mansion life, so the girlfriends were expected to look flawless. Couple that expectation with the fact that we
girls had a lot of time on our hands, and you get marathon “beauty
days.” All of the girls started their day visiting the salon to spend hours
on an elaborate hairdo. That year I had purple streaks clipped into my
long blond extensions. Costumes were customized down to the tiniest
detail and diets were strictly observed in the weeks before a big party.
I was so critical of my appearance—particularly my weight. A girl
could rarely be too skinny at the mansion. After all, there were expectations that we become the Playboy fantasy everyone expected us to be.
And in order to be that woman, it was essential that we looked the
part.
Plagued by self-doubt, I was constantly troubled by an imaginary
belly and would often add a single garter to my costumes to hide a tiny
dot on the back of my left leg. God forbid, someone might think I had
cellulite. These days I look back at photos from my mansion days and
marvel how a girl that skinny could ever think she was fat, but I suppose I was a product of my environment. After spending much of my
adulthood as nothing more than a trophy girlfriend whose sole occupation was to look good, I guess I can’t really blame myself.
On the night of Hef’s 78th birthday party we made our entrance
into the great hall around nine o’clock. Hef’s photographer Elayne
snapped our obligatory photos. As was customary, Mark Frazier, the
body painter, brought the “Painted Ladies” over for a photo with us as
well. Kendra was already carrying a tray of Jell-O shots and she



nervously offered them to us. Bridget, Hef, and I happily took one each
as the Mean Girls just ignored her with an icy coldness.
Hef wasted no time inviting the “Painted Ladies” up to his bedroom. Nicole was physically the least Hef’s type, with her curvier body
and strawberry-blond hair, so I knew right away that she wasn’t making the cut, despite her participation in the sack.
Tiffany was the only one who wasn’t willing to go all the way
(Good for her!), so even though I really liked her, I knew she wasn’t
going to be invited back.
Through the process of elimination, the 19-year-old platinum
blonde from San Diego was in position to be Hugh Hefner’s next girlfriend—if she played her cards right. In Kendra’s book Sliding into
Home, she describes Hef asking her to be a girlfriend and handing her
a house key before he invited her up to the bedroom. Now, I don’t
know if Kendra is trying to sound extra-desirable, innocent, or if her
memory is just super rusty, but of course that’s not how it really went
down. Hef isn’t stupid. He never asked anyone to become a girlfriend
before they joined him in bed. And he never made a habit of carrying
around extra sets of room keys.
Because Kendra seemed pleasant, Bridget and I started encouraging Hef to ask her to move in. We openly (and loudly) chatted about
how nice we thought she was.
“I don’t know . . . she doesn’t seem to have much personality,” Hef
responded.
I rolled my eyes. Since when did he care about personality? Only a
positive comment from Bridget or me could turn Hef off to this girl
who was so clearly his type. Did I mention he hated it when his girlfriends got along? I could see what he meant, though. In the early
days, Kendra wasn’t the bubbly, bouncy loudmouth you may remember from The Girls Next Door. Her personality could best be described



as “deer in the headlights.” It was difficult to get a word out of her, and
she seemed to have fried her brain somewhere along the course of her
life. At the time, I just assumed she was shy or afraid of making a misstep while trying to navigate Hef’s world.
Despite his supposed reservations, he did continue to have her as
a guest at the mansion. Kendra was still living in San Diego at the
time, so Hef invited her to stay through a whole weekend and join us
for the big Easter celebration that Sunday. Bridget and I had gone
down to Melrose to pick out matching dresses for the festivities—including one for Kendra. I knew she didn’t have a ton of clothes and
was probably stressing out just like I used to.
Usually I wouldn’t be so eager to dress like anybody’s twin, but I
knew how adorable Hef thought it was when the girls dressed alike.
After nearly three years at the mansion, I was pretty attuned to Hef’s
preferences. I imagined him seeing the three of us together in matching outfits and thinking, “Oh, how cute.” By getting Kendra to dress
the part of a new girlfriend, I hoped it would help Hef make up his
mind and set us apart from the Mean Girls, who would most likely
show up to the Easter event wearing jeans and bored looks on their
faces.
When we got back to the mansion, I went out to the room in the
guesthouse where Kendra was staying, holding the new blue dress. I
told her it was hers to wear if she wanted and that Bridget was wearing
a pink one and I had a pale orange version.
“Oh my god, girl!” she said, I could see the relief on her face as a
big toothy grin emerged. “You have no idea. I was going nuts.” She
thanked me profusely. For the first time in a long time, I felt as though
I could relax. I had a good feeling about this one. Just because Hef
didn’t want another Bridget or Holly didn’t mean we couldn’t all be
friends. I wanted her to feel welcome.



Realizing that the opportunity might soon present itself, Kendra
began asking questions about life as a girlfriend as she changed into
the dress. She had already hooked up with Hef, so that part was no
mystery.
“Can I bring my dogs when I move in? I have to bring my dogs,”
she stated. “I have two dogs. I need a really big room.”
“I don’t know what room you will get if you move in,” I said.
“That’s up to Hef.”
I have to admit, I envied Kendra’s sense of entitlement. I had felt
so lucky just to scrape by when I moved into the mansion, and here
was a rookie who had just gone all the way with an old dude and her
only concern was how big her room was going to be.
Though she wasn’t as cunning or sophisticated as the other girlfriends who had inhabited the mansion in recent years, she seemed to
have that same hustler mentality. Kendra was a stripper but had told
Hef she was a college student, because the body painter gave her the
heads-up that Hef didn’t like strippers and preferred college girls.
When Hef put a caption under one of the first photos of her that
entered his scrapbook, he referred to her as “Hef’s new sweetheart: a
19-year-old coed from San Diego.”
“I need a car, too, if I’m gonna live here,” she barked. “I don’t have
one. And I want to get my teeth fixed. They are the only thing about
me that I don’t like.”
The balls on this girl, I thought.
“Oh, you’ll have to talk to Hef about that,” I responded, shrugging
my shoulders. I barely had the nerve to ask for anything for myself—I
certainly wasn’t going to ask for her.
The Easter ensembles worked. About a month after Hef’s birthday, the Mean Girls were finally given the boot and Kendra was officially asked to be a girlfriend. After three years of misery, which at the



time I felt was largely due to those bullies, it was over. They were
gone—and I’d never have to see or hear from them again! It didn’t
really feel real. I actually went down the hall and peeked into each of
their former bedrooms to make sure they were really gone.
“What did you say to them?” I asked Hef when he told me the girlfriends were leaving. I couldn’t be certain that my prompting actually
had anything to do with Hef’s decision, but I silently congratulated
myself either way.
“I told them that Kendra’s moving in and Kendra had confided to
me that she used to have a drug problem,” he said, nonchalantly
thumbing through a file folder he had in his hand. “Kendra told me
they took her out to a club and offered her drugs. I told them I couldn’t
have that around her.”
Of course, I thought. I wasn’t sure how they managed to sneak out
of the house with Kendra, but according to her story, they did. If the
story was true, the Mean Girls must have seen exactly what was happening and made a last-ditch effort to save their asses and sabotage
Kendra’s chances. Thankfully, it backfired.
Kendra’s arrival was the best news I had in a while! I was ecstatic
to have those days of drama and backstabbing permanently behind me
. . . or so I thought.
JUST AS HE HAD done with me when I first arrived, Hef quickly made
Kendra his “golden girl.” After all, she was the youngest and newest
member of his harem.
Immediately, Kendra acquired a black Escalade that she “pimped
out” with rims, speakers, and every extra accessory possible. She also
snagged the room she wanted, Bedroom 2. It was the largest, most
luxurious, and most plush of all the bedrooms—and she would



instantly trash it. Kendra’s room turned into a junk-dump of possessions and reeked so badly of dog urine that you could smell it down
the hall. I always tried to avoid staying in her room longer than a few
minutes.
Since the house was virtually empty, I decided to ask Hef if I
could use Bedroom 5 again so I could have more room for my
things—and a little privacy when I needed it. Living in the “Vanity”
made me feel on edge. Hef’s secretaries were constantly in and out of
there throughout the day, adjusting his calendar and wooden box full
of pictures. I liked all of Hef’s secretaries, but I would have liked a
little solitude, too.
“Absolutely not!” Hef squawked, setting down his reading glasses.
“Do you have any idea how much those rooms cost to rent?”
Actually, I did. Playboy Enterprises (a public company at the
time) owned the mansion. Not Hef. In order to live there, he had to
pay a monthly rent on every room he and his girlfriends occupied.
People may find it surprising that Hugh Hefner is nothing more than a
tenant renting his room at the mansion, but that’s exactly how it is. At
the time, he paid approximately $25,000 a month for the master suite,
$12,000 a month for Kendra’s room, and $10,000 a month for Bridget’s room (Bedroom 3). The three smaller rooms were priced between
$5,000 and $7,000 a month. Should any of the rooms be vacant, Hef
wouldn’t be charged for them.
So Kendra’s worth $12,000 and I’m not even worth $5,000, was
what I took away from the conversation. Since I lived in the “Vanity”
corner of Hef’s closet, he didn’t have to pay any rent on my account.
Despite these little annoyances, things were actually going
smoothly in the house between Bridget, Kendra, and me. To my great
relief, Hef mentioned to his immediate circle that he was “downsizing”
to “just” three girlfriends. Just when I thought this new “quality over



quantity” arrangement might mean less drama, Hef decided to drop a
bomb on us all.
During a Fun in the Sun pool party, Bridget and I were reading
and sunning ourselves on side-by-side lounge chairs while Kendra sat
on a floatie near the edge of the pool. As Hef shuffled along the flagstone walkway between us carrying his backgammon board, he paused
and looked around at each of us.
“You know,” he began, taking a swig from his bottle of Pepsi, “I’ve
decided I’m going to do a pictorial on the ‘Painted Ladies,’ featuring
you and Tiffany.” He nodded towards Kendra, but spoke loudly
enough for us all to hear.
“Oh, wow!” Kendra shouted. “Thanks!”
Pretending we didn’t hear a word, Bridget and I kept our noses
buried in whatever we were reading. We didn’t know what to say.
“I just want to put my book down and leave,” I said defeatedly.
“He knows how badly you and I want to be in the magazine and he just
had to make that awkward announcement in front of us?”
“I know,” she sighed.
We knew that Hef was trying to make us jealous and feel like shit,
but I felt helpless, like there was nothing I could say.
One particular day, Kendra appeared a little more somber than
usual. Like all of us, she had her rough days—especially in the beginning—and we tried to coach her through, but that day she seemed
really depressed. Bridget and I were desperate to win Kendra over and
create the “happy family” we had always wished we had at the
mansion.
“We’re going out tonight,” I declared, popping my head into her
room. Immediately, Kendra’s eyes lit up. Clearly, she needed a night
away—even if only until 9 P.M.



Hef was hosting his “manly night” at the mansion, which meant
the girlfriends were required to make themselves scarce. Bridget and I
thought it would be fun to take Kendra out for dinner. She was still
new to Los Angeles, so we thought taking her out on the town would
be just what she needed to lift her spirits. We decided on Nic’s, a popular martini lounge in Beverly Hills, for appetizers and cocktails.
When evening finally rolled around, Kendra seemed elated to be
outside the mansion gates without Hef’s parent-like supervision.
“Girl, do you think there’s anyone famous here?” she sort of
shout-whispered in my general direction, craning her neck to see if she
could spot a celebrity tucked into one of the restaurant’s dark corners.
“I’m going to get a cocktail,” I suggested, thinking we should toast
our first-ever girl’s night out. Nic’s was known for their creative cocktails with their cleverly punny names, like “Last Mango in Paris” and
“Coco Cabana.” Bridget and I each ordered some fruity concoction as
Kendra pored over the menu with a furrowed brow.
When it came her turn to order, Kendra announced that she
would be having the “Sake to Me.”
“Excuse me?” the waitress asked, clearly not understanding the
order. Kendra had mispronounced the Japanese rice wine by saying
“sake” as if it rhymed with “take.”
“The ‘Sake to Me,’ ” Kendra repeated, the same way she had pronounced it the first time, only slower and more aggressively. I felt myself wince.
The waitress appeared generally perplexed. I shot Bridget a look,
but she was already making herself busy with the cloth napkin. One of
my biggest pet peeves is people who are rude to servers. I could sense
Kendra’s frustration getting the best of her, but before I could intervene she groaned and snapped the menu off the table, pointing firmly
to the drink.



“The ‘Sake to Me,’ ” she barked, once again mispronouncing the
main word.
“Oh, the ‘Sah-keh to Me’!” the waitress echoed, clearly relieved
that she finally understood what Kendra was getting at.
“Yeah, that’s what I said,” Kendra jeered, looking back at the
table.
Unfortunately, the Playboy Mansion was a breeding ground for
that kind of arrogant behavior—especially among Hef’s girlfriends.
And shortly after, Kendra’s began to take off.
One day when I was out shopping, I fell in love with these adorable skirts at Bebe that I knew Bridget and I would both love. They
were mid-length, flowy, and dripping in sequins. I picked out a pink
one for Bridget and a cream-colored one for myself. I wanted to make
sure that Kendra didn’t feel left out, so I picked up the baby blue version for her.
When I got back to the mansion, I found Kendra in her room and
handed her the bag.
“I found these really cute skirts today and picked them up for us
in different colors. I thought we could wear them out to the club tonight if you want to,” I said, helping myself to a seat at the edge of the
bed.
Kendra lazily pulled the skirt out of the bag and ripped the tissue
off from around it. She held it up for a moment before shoving it back
into the bag.
“Yeah, I don’t really like it,” she said, wrinkling her nose and
handing it back to me.
I ignored the glossy black bag being shoved at my face. Sure, I
didn’t want to be a clone, either, but couldn’t she just have said thanks
and tucked it into her closet? Up until this point, Bridget and I hadn’t



been on the receiving end of her snotty remarks, so I was a little surprised at the direction this conversation was taking.
“Well, I got it for you because I didn’t want you to feel left out,” I
added.
“I won’t wear it,” she snapped back, dropping the bag to the floor
and turning her attention back to the TV that so frequently occupied
her hours.
“You don’t have to,” I said finally and walked out her door, leaving
the bag on the ground. Honestly, my feelings were hurt. I went out of
my way to do something nice for her and it came back to bite me in the
ass. I felt like I was damned if I did and damned if I didn’t. I’m not
sure if she ever wore the skirt. It’s probably still sitting in Bedroom 2’s
closet.
Later that evening, after spending roughly 45 minutes twiddling
our thumbs in the great hall waiting for Kendra to grace us with her
presence, she finally emerged from her bedroom looking like a petite
sex kitten in a red spandex dress, Lucite platform heels, large blond
barrel curls cascading from her head, and bright, candy apple red lipstick applied with perfect precision.
Immediately I cringed.
Oh shit, I thought. This was going to be bad. Bridget quickly shot
me a knowing glance, her eyes wide with concern. As Kendra
sauntered down into the foyer, I braced myself for impact.
The last time I had tried to wear red lipstick was two years earlier,
the day I had cut my hair and Hef had bit my head off for it. It was
such a memorable moment that when Kendra appeared in the main
entryway with her lips painted bright red, my entire body tensed. It
had been two years since Hef’s reprimand, but the humiliation still
burned inside me.



I could tell that Hef was already irritated that she kept us waiting
this long and now seeing the red lips . . . he was not going to be happy.
Slowly he made his way to his newest girlfriend to more closely
scrutinize her face. My jaw clenched as he inched toward her.
What horrible thing was he about to say? I thought. I looked
down at my hands and squinted my eyes. After what felt like an eternity just waiting for him to erupt, he finally let out a big guttural laugh.
My eyes sprang up to make sure I was hearing this correctly.
“Why, that red lipstick looks absolutely wonderful on you,
Kendra!” he boomed, grabbing her arms and kissing her on the cheek.
“You look like you just stepped out of a 1940s movie!”
I looked over to Bridget, who had the same surprised look
plastered on her face that I was sure I had on mine. Surely he was being facetious and was about to unload on her, right? Not only did he
not despise the look, he thought she looked “wonderful.”
My head was spinning. Kendra and I were not so unlike that red
lipstick could have looked that much better on her than it did on me.
What about Bridget? Tina? Vicky? April? Or any of the other five
dozen girls who were told never to wear the hue?
I was waiting for the other shoe to drop when the house photographer gestured for us all to line up for a photograph, but nothing
more was said. Did I somehow manage to stumble into an episode of
The Twilight Zone?
“Are you kidding me?” I whispered to Bridget when we finally
piled into the limo. I could feel the hurt boiling inside me.
She just shook her head.
“So he just loves red lipstick now?” I asked sarcastically. How
could his decades-long opinion transform so suddenly with one girl? I
was crushed. That was the reaction I had thought I would have received years earlier. Over such a minor thing, I was belittled and made



to feel like trash. But Kendra did it and gets praised? I didn’t resent
Kendra; it wasn’t her fault. It was Hef who made me mad.
All the Playmates who were waiting to go out with us noticed how
taken aback I was. That’s one of the things about Hef: when it came to
humiliating his girlfriends, the larger the audience, the better.
“I think he was trying to get to you,” one of the girls whispered,
pretending to search through her purse. “I don’t think he really likes
it.” It was her way of trying to comfort me.
Seriously? I thought. Sure, Hef had a habit of pitting the youngest
girl against his main girl; that tradition had been going on since the
days of “Mama Hen” Tina and “Baby Face” Buffy, but this was sick.
Was he really trying to stir up my feelings of inadequacy by praising a
19-year-old? I was only 25, which was hardly ancient (unless you’re
talking to Hugh Hefner).
“There’s no way he remembers,” I said, only half believing my
own lie. “It was like two years ago.”
“Holly,” she said, taking a moment to meet my eyes. “You know
he remembers everything.”
I stared back at her and let this sink in. She was right. He knew
exactly what he was doing. He catalogues shit like that for just these
types of moments. Men don’t achieve his kind of power and success by
being idiots. He didn’t want a big, happy family of girlfriends that all
got along. He wanted multiple women frothing with jealousy and animosity towards each other. It was a part of his control game. I could
never accuse him of doing it on purpose, because he would simply
brush off my accusation by declaring how preposterous it all sounded.
And he’d be right. It does sound insane, but that didn’t make it any
less true.
Quickly I shut off my pride and put on the biggest smile I could
muster. If he can pretend he doesn’t remember, I can too. I can’t let



him believe he succeeded; he wouldn’t use Kendra as a pawn to get the
best of me. But believe me, he would end up trying.
DESPITE MY ATTEMPTS TO befriend Kendra, she continued to push me
away. Hungry for her own “team,” Kendra desperately tried to make
each new Playmate who arrived at the mansion her friend—and her
friend alone. Kendra’s plan rarely worked, though. Most of the new
Playmates were nice girls who were eager to get to know all of the girlfriends. And, let’s face it, Kendra wasn’t the easiest person to have a
conversation with. When the new Playmates would make an effort to
spend time with Bridget or me, they were confused when Kendra suddenly lost interest in being their friend. A girl was not allowed to play
both sides of the fence, so Kendra would toss her aside and find the
next person to entertain her.
And as is true with any caged animal, it was dangerous when
Kendra grew bored.
Her frustrations had been mounting for a while. She had been at
the mansion for a few months, and Hef hadn’t asked her to be a Playmate yet. Even though she was well aware that Bridget and I had never
been in the magazine, she thought she was somehow different (perhaps because of the “Painted Lady” pictorial she posed for in the
September 2004 issue) and couldn’t understand why she wasn’t
already on the cover.
“I’m locked down,” she would frequently say, referring to her new
life behind the gates. It’s no secret that Kendra was a pretty hard-core
party girl before coming to the mansion. She battled drug addiction
throughout her teenage years and eventually became a stripper to
make extra cash. When Hef finally asked her to move into the



mansion, Kendra thought she hit the jackpot. After all, wasn’t Playboy
all about excess? Money, parties, and sex.
But, as she quickly realized, those nights were few and far
between—and rarely as much fun as you’d think. The public’s image of
the freewheeling leave-your-inhibitions-at-the-door atmosphere of the
Playboy Mansion was not a reality for any of Hugh Hefner’s girlfriends. The atmosphere resembled the court of Versailles, with each
guest obsessed with rank and standing. There was even a hierarchy
among Hef’s friends when it came to seats at the dinner table. At 19
years old, Kendra was stuck with a 9 P.M. curfew, a 78-year-old boyfriend, and a stricter set of rules than she had ever had at home. And
now, adding insult to injury, she was finally realizing that she wasn’t
as special as Hef made her believe. She was just another blond girlfriend—and life at the mansion wasn’t all she imagined it to be.
Much like the battle I endured—and ultimately lost—years earlier,
Kendra was desperately searching for an identity of her own. Being a
clone was soul sucking; you were simply another blond number on
Hef’s arm.
In the beginning, Kendra was very quiet. The raucous deepthroated cackle that became her trademark on GND was something
she affected in order to stand out. I know I have no place to talk when
it comes to annoying laughs, but with Kendra, it was clear she was just
being as loud as possible in order to make sure every head in the room
turned her way.
“Why is Kendra laughing like that?” one of the visiting Playmates
had asked me, unaccustomed to the new sound. “She’s so annoying! If
no one is paying attention to her, she just screams out of the blue!”
I just shrugged my shoulders, hoping it was just a passing phase.
But Kendra wouldn’t shut it off until she was certain all eyes were on



her. The laugh never did vanish, though. Even today she still adopts
that cackle. I bet by now it’s almost natural. Almost.
Eventually, these sort of exaggerated antics became her trademark. For example: flying. She claimed to be so terrified of flying that
she would put on a massive show in front of Hef during takeoff that resembled a loud, prolonged, frightened orgasm. It was embarrassing to
witness. And wouldn’t you know, when we were finally able to fly with
Kendra on our own (read: without an audience of men for her to perform for), she was remarkably calm during the entire flight.
Kendra had been living at the mansion for close to a year when
my patience finally started to wear. We were all out at the nightclub of
the moment in Hollywood with some potential Playmates. Bridget and
I flanked Hef in a corner booth while the other girls danced and
partied around us. Always trying my best to be as attentive as possible,
I remained seated next to Hef the whole night, drinking and watching
the clock.
Immediately, Kendra hoisted herself to the top of the banquette.
Surrounded by the Playmate posse (all of whom were her BFFs on this
particular evening), Kendra put on a show dancing as provocatively
and wildly as she could until she was certain every set of eyes in the
nightclub were focused squarely on her. In all of her theatrics, Kendra
didn’t notice the large candles near her feet. One minute she was shaking her ass and the next a cascade of hot wax was scorching down my
leg.
I jumped to my feet and began swiping at my thigh. Kendra took a
brief moment to take in the situation before turning her attention back
to the other Playmates and letting out a long, loud laugh, not even taking a moment to apologize.



Hef was oblivious to what had just happened—recognizing that
something was wrong only when I stood up and started peeling the
wax off my leg. He finally asked what had happened.
“Kendra dumped hot wax all over my leg,” I said angrily. “She
knocked that candle over while she was dancing, looked right at me,
and didn’t even apologize.”
“I’m sure she didn’t mean it,” Hef said, ignoring how upset I was
and turning his head back towards the crowd dancing in front of us.
He decided it was time to leave a few minutes later. Thank God, I
thought. I just wanted this night to be over so I could forget about this
latest humiliation, just as I had tried to forget all the others I had experienced since joining the mansion fold.
As we navigated our way through the sea of gawkers, we were
stuck in an absolute traffic jam. Picture Hugh Hefner, roughly 10 girls,
and a handful of security guards trying to push their way through this
dark, tiny, crowded nightclub. It was a nightmare. Not only was I
angry and irritated, but my skin was still burning from where the wax
had landed.
Kendra was bouncing along behind me, laughing and dancing
with the other Playmates as we made our way to the door. She must
have sensed my irritation (how could she not?) but still said nothing.
Instead, as soon as our group stalled, she threw up her hands and
screamed at me: “Move, bitch! Get out tha’ way!”
I whipped my head back around and screamed right back. “Shut
up!” I yelled in her face. “You spilled hot wax on me, don’t say anything, and then call me a bitch? FUCK YOU!”
Kendra’s smiled faded and the Playmates got quiet. I never lost
my cool like that, so everyone knew I was seriously pissed.
“What?” she said, her eyes like saucers and looking from side to
side at the other girls, grasping for some kind of support. “It’s a song.”



It hurt enough to have to be constantly humiliated by Hef, but
now I had to take it from a 19-year-old bimbo who I had been nothing
but welcoming to? I was losing my patience. When we finally made
our way to the door, I turned to Hef.
“She’s totally inconsiderate,” I grumbled. “How could she not
even say she was sorry?”
I took my seat in the back of the limo, and much to my surprise,
Hef finally opened his mouth.
“You know, Kendra, you really should apologize to Holly,” he said,
in a sort of fatherly, condescending tone.
That’s when the train went off the tracks.
Kendra burst into tears—a hyperventilating, sobbing mess of
tears.
“You guys are my family,” she wailed, reaching for the bottle of
vodka from the limo bar. “I’d stick up for any of you guys no matter
what!”
She pulled off the cap and started downing the vodka. The entire
limo fell silent. In between swigs, she cried and blurted out some
mumbo jumbo through sobs that no one really understood.
One of the girls tried to calm her down, but Kendra was either too
drunk or too crazy to control herself. Hef, Bridget, and I fell silent before telling her that we would be there for her, too. The whole display
was shocking and kind of sad.
It simply wasn’t normal. It seemed as if Kendra, finally finding
herself on Hef’s bad side, broke down and retreated into a drunken fit.
Like a toddler throwing a temper tantrum, she guzzled down the
vodka in hopes that Hef would feel that urge to rescue her or care for
her. It was both manipulative and incredibly sad. From that night forward, I was always a bit more cautious with Kendra. A woman who allows herself to enter into a situation like the one we were in must



struggle with personal demons—I know I did. Kendra was harmless,
sort of like an annoying kid sister. Our relationship would have its ups
and downs over the next few years, but I learned to pick my battles
and appreciate that she was just as damaged as the rest of us. She just
had a different way of showing it.
There wouldn’t be time to focus on such things moving forward.
Our lives were about to change and the three of us would be further
united on a brand-new project—like it or not.

CHAPTER 8

“We’re all mad here. I’m mad. You’re mad.”
“How do you know I’m mad?” said Alice.
“You must be,” said the Cat, “or you wouldn’t have
come here.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

W

ould you say that Kendra is ‘growing up’ at the mansion?” posed
Jerica, the young, freckle-faced field producer sitting across from me.
It was 2005 and we were in the mansion’s game house filming my first
set of one-on-one interviews for a new unscripted E! series spotlighting Hef, his three girlfriends, and our lives inside the mansion. The
question completely caught me off guard. Don’t get me wrong, I was
excited at the prospect of doing a television show—day-to-day life was
so monotonous that I welcomed any sort of change, opportunity, or
even that chance at fame I had once hoped for—but at the time reality
TV still had a pretty negative stigma. My time at the mansion hadn’t
been all that rosy, so I was anxious about what the show would entail.
Naturally, this particular question set off a siren in my head.



“No, I wouldn’t say that,” I said, a bit more defensively than intended. “It sounds gross and inappropriate. Besides, she’s 20 years old;
she’s grown up already.”
It’s not like we really had a choice when it came to doing the
show, so all that anxiety was really for naught. Once Hef approved the
idea, it was full steam ahead. No one even bothered to ask our opinions about filming the show, even if it was just a courtesy. “Trophy
girlfriends” are better seen and not heard. But what did I really expect? At the mansion, it was always Hef’s way or the highway.
We weren’t given a choice in the nudity aspect of the show, either.
When the first season started filming, we weren’t shy about being in
front of the camera in various stages of undress—we knew everything
would have to be blurred out in order to air on television and the cameramen shot us from creative angles to avoid landing any nudity on
the show. Halfway through the first season, though, someone must
have realized that nudity could be shown in foreign television markets
and on DVDs, so getting as much nudity as possible on camera became
a priority. No one ever consulted the three stars of the show when it
came to this issue, and I wasn’t aware of the change until after it had
been put into effect.
As intelligent as he is calculating, Hef saw the series as an opportunity to capitalize on the new genre of television that was sprouting
up and once again reinvent the brand while bringing in a fresh audience to Playboy. And the needs of “the brand” always trumped those
of “the girlfriends.” It was understood that if we chose to continue living at the mansion, we had to agree to be featured on the series. I’ve
always been a private person despite my public life, so I was wary
about the repercussions. Would Hef feel the need to bring in more
girlfriends for ratings? Would the spotlight bring out our worst?
Would producers try to stir up drama among the three of us?



Jerica waited patiently for me to fill the silence, probably hoping I
would break.
“After all, she is an adult,” I said, rounding out my thought. I had
shown up for the interview intending to look as wholesome as possible, wearing a pastel print button-up dress shirt, my hair pulled back
into a ponytail with newly cut bangs, and very light, fresh-faced
makeup. Despite my years of acting classes, I’d never watched myself
on camera being “myself.” When we finally screened the first episode
months later, I was absolutely horrified by my appearance. I looked so
dour on camera, realizing that the corners of my mouth naturally
turned down when I spoke. I looked washed out. Moving forward, I
would take to caking on makeup like a beauty pageant contestant and
grinning ear to ear for every interview.
“Well, I just meant that she’s young and sort of like the kid sister,”
Jerica continued calmly. The suggestive remark struck a chord with
me for a few reasons. First off, I was only 26 years old myself at the
time. Given the relationship I was in, I didn’t really feel like age should
matter. We were adults and free to date whomever we chose. Let’s be
honest, our dramatic age difference wasn’t an uncommon question,
but Jerica asked it in a way that made me feel like there were ulterior
motives at play—like she was using some sneaky back-door approach
to get me to say something I didn’t intend to.
“If I say that, it makes it seem like he’s a pedophile, and that’s just
gross,” I said, point-blank. No sense beating around the bush.
Second of all, I hadn’t seen an episode pieced together yet and
was still pretty untrusting of the process. Were they going to paint Hef
as this villainous, predatory man? Part of me was still protective of
him. Hindsight offers many luxuries, but in that moment my view was
still clouded by the fantasy that Hef was my boyfriend.



“The idea that one of his girlfriends is still ‘growing up’ feels
wrong,” I explained, more politely than before—aware of all the eyes
currently on me.
“Okay, fair enough,” said Jerica. She continued to the next question, lobbing me a softball. “What do you see life like five years from
now?” Mechanically, I jumped into my spiel.
“In five years, I would love for it to be just me and Hef,” I said,
smiling and trailing off into my standard response. I was a part of
Hugh Hefner’s publicity machine and made sure that everything I said
publicly was what I thought he would want me to say. Part of me
wanted to please him, but mostly I was terrified of being reprimanded
or losing favor by simply saying something he felt was off-color or
didn’t paint him in the godliest of lights. This was hardly my first dalliance with press interviews, so I had most of the answers down pat.
I think the “growing up” question struck a nerve even deeper than
I cared to admit. Frankly speaking, I’ve always been pretty uncomfortable by Hef’s fascination with extremely young women. He was obsessed with women looking as young as humanly possible.
Everything—absolutely everything—about that skeeved me out. Jerica’s needling pushed some button to cause all this subconscious crap
to surface, but luckily I was still tucked safely into my corner of denial
and quickly repressed the thoughts.
“How do you feel about the nine o’clock curfew?” Jerica asked,
resting her chin in her hand. People were always fascinated by the
curfew. As I’ve said, I was a homebody anyway—and little did outsiders know that the curfew was hardly the worst thing about mansion
life. Like a robot, I happily went back to my Hef and Playboy-friendly
responses, the hard questions dodged for the day.
Though The Girls Next Door marked a sudden change in Bridget’s, Kendra’s, and my lives, the series wasn’t created overnight.



Throughout 2004 and early 2005, different entities had expressed interest in developing a Playboy Mansion reality show. At first I paid no
attention to the rumblings, thinking it would have nothing to do with
me. The ideas that were being thrown around didn’t center on the girlfriends. Ideas surfaced like, “Growing Up Hefner: What Life Is Like as
Hugh Hefner’s Son” or “Upstairs, Downstairs: The Butlers of the Playboy Mansion.”
We were sat down for test interviews, along with the butlers.
There is no doubt in my mind everyone on the other side of the cameras thought that Hugh Hefner’s three girlfriends would be the most demanding, unreasonable bitches of all time, making the staff’s life hell
at any given moment. None of these people, not even the executive
producer (a close friend of Hef’s), had ever gotten to know Bridget,
Kendra, or me.
My test interview, for the most part, was relatively uneventful. I
was asked all the usual questions about what life at the mansion was
like: How is it having a nine o’clock curfew? What do you order from
the kitchen? Where do you shop? Do you mind sharing your boyfriend? And I, like the drone I had become, answered all the questions
with the same rote, dry answers I gave everyone else. The three repressive years I had spent at the mansion had drained all the personality out of me anyway, so I’m sure I sounded like a robot.
Then I was asked a question that threw me for a loop: “When did
you first realize you were beautiful?” I started a bit, taken out of my
hypnosis by an out-of-the-ordinary question.
“I never did discover I was beautiful,” I snapped. “I made myself
beautiful.”
One of the head producers would later say to me that this answer
led him to believe that they had something with the girls and maybe
there was more of a story here than just “how do butlers deal with



demanding, spoiled bitches while naked Playmates are running
around them all the time?”
The answer I gave was the one honest, spontaneous thing I had
said all day, and it alluded to so many things:
1. That I had been conditioned to believe that I was not
beautiful.
2. That I was possibly entirely composed of plastic surgery (I
wasn’t; I stopped after the nose job).
3. That there was a little more going on in my head than
most people would assume: that I was in on the joke.
It was finally Lisa Berger, then president of programming at E!,
who suggested she would like to see what life at the mansion was like
through the eyes of the girls: a Dorothy in Oz kind of take on the Playboy world.
I was torn on whether or not to be excited about this project.
I had come to L.A. wanting to be an actress. My newfound lack of
self-esteem had made me crave fame for fame’s sake. I had started taking hosting classes, hoping to make it in any way I could: acting, hosting, modeling, whatever. The one thing I hadn’t considered was reality
TV. Despite my hunger to be in the spotlight professionally, I have always been a very private person. Even before I moved into the mansion, I changed my last name, in part to protect my family’s privacy
should I become known. Even the small amount of notoriety I had
already gained from being one of Hef’s girlfriends made me extremely
uncomfortable—being a part of a bimbo harem was not what I wanted
to be famous for.
On the one hand, exposure on reality television could lead to
many opportunities. Perhaps even something that could give me some



pride, some financial security, and maybe even enough confidence to
leave one day.
On the other hand, the drama demanded by a reality show could
turn the mansion back into the snake pit it used to be during the Mean
Girls days (on and off camera). The prospect made me anxious and
depressed.
I was also scared of being lumped into a “blond bimbo” stereotype. After all, I remembered how I had felt recently when we had
filmed an episode of Entourage at the mansion.
We were each given one simple line to say on camera, surrounded
by the show’s cast, crew, and hundreds of extras. The scene had to be
shot over and over and over again to the point of lunacy . . . because
Kendra couldn’t get her one line right.
I was beyond mortified and prayed that the floor would just swallow me up. I was certain everyone on set was assuming that all three of
us were equally ditsy. The thought of having to be compared like that,
on a weekly basis, gave me crazy anxiety.
There were days I woke up, sat at the desk I had added to the vanity area, and just felt like falling to the floor because I felt so depressed. Though it is completely obvious to me now why I felt so dark,
believe it or not, back then I was stumped.
Don’t I have everything I want? I asked myself. The Mean Girls
were gone and life at the mansion was easier. I was slowly saving up a
little money, and I was living in the lap of luxury.
Of course, to keep myself from really losing it, I was completely
ignoring the fact that anyone who was part of an old man’s harem and
treated like a brainless idiot would be depressed.
Feeling like I was at a breaking point, I had told Hef that I needed
to see a psychiatrist during one of my sob sessions, but my confession
fell on deaf ears. He refused to let me see a therapist because, as he



put it, a therapist would just tell me to leave the mansion. He told me
to talk to Mary about my problems instead.
In spite of his objections, I did end up seeing a therapist in order
to get some prescription medication. The therapist diagnosed me with
depression brought on by my anxiety over filming the reality show and
how it would affect my life. He prescribed me Effexor, a drug prescribed to those with serious depression (one I weaned myself off of a
few years later). It made me feel a little better for the time being and
helped buoy me through the mansion for a few more years.
THE FIRST EPISODE OF The Girls Next Door introduced the E! audience
to Hugh Hefner’s three blond girlfriends. Through interviews and
“candid” moments, the series established the lay of the land at the
Playboy mansion: the girls, the grounds, the pets, the curfew, the
24-hour kitchen, and other mansion oddities. The episode wrapped up
with Hef, his girlfriends, and a handful of Playmates waiting for
Kendra before heading to Hollywood for the AFI Awards red carpet
honoring Star Wars creator George Lucas. The footage showed a jovial
Hef hobnobbing with celebrities, goofing around with press, and
routinely holding, hugging, or kissing one of his many dates.
“We get respect,” Kendra said in a voice-over while the camera
panned to showcase our backsides sauntering into the theater. I remember wondering, Does she really think people respect us? She
seemed clueless to the fact that most people probably didn’t respect us
for how we were living our lives and that the cheers and accolades she
was witnessing were simply due to Hef’s strange novelty as a pop culture oddity. I, on the other hand, was probably too aware of the negative ways in which we were perceived. And this awareness made me



paranoid. In fact, I let it get to me so much that I became even quieter
and more withdrawn than I had been before.
“We’ve decided on your characters for the show!” Hef told me one
day when he ran across me in one of the secretaries’ offices, going
through Polaroids.
“Really?” I asked, curious as to what he meant.
“Kendra is the one who wants to have fun, Bridget is the one who
wants a career, and you’re the one who cares about me.”
His delivery made it clear that the decision had been firmly made
and that there was no room for argument. While caring about
someone is certainly a positive thing, I was troubled by the limitations
of our “characters.” Couldn’t we actually be who we are? Multidimensional people who have different interests, passions, and goals? Sure,
Bridget wanted a career, but what about me? I couldn’t want one, too?
Apparently not.
I was too distracted to ask any more about it. I had been going
through photos looking for potential Fun in the Sun guests while we
were talking. Hef had long ago lost interest in trolling for new conquests, so much so that the pool party guest list had dwindled
substantially.
Somehow I had found an old Polaroid from the year 2000 buried
deep in the pile.
I blinked a few times to make sure I was seeing this properly: it
was me! I was wearing a black Frederick’s of Hollywood corset with a
kimono robe and sporting strawberry-blond hair, but the real surprise
was the “grade” I had received from Hef: A.
All these years at the mansion being made to feel ugly and less
than—and he had marked me as an A all along!
Hef had already shuffled back down the hall.



“I can’t believe I got an A!” I said to Jenny, Hef’s social secretary,
genuinely in shock. Hef always treated me like such a scrub, like I was
barely lucky enough to be in residence at the mansion.
“Well, of course you did,” Jenny said, matter-of-factly. “What did
you think you would have gotten?”
WHILE I KNEW THAT people were curious about the world inside the
Playboy gates, I found it hard to imagine how we would fill an entire
season. Relative to scripted shows, reality television is inexpensive to
make (which is the reason so many of them litter the airwaves). I hate
to burst anyone’s bubble, but in order to get the most for their time
and money, producers typically map out episodes in advance based on
schedules and then determine what could make for potential plotlines.
While our crew initially filmed us at all hours hoping for some of that
legendary Playboy spontaneity, they eventually learned that mansion
life didn’t quite live up to the hype after countless hours (and probably
thousands of wasted crew dollars) were spent filming the most
mundane moments of our lives.
Finding interesting things for us to do proved more difficult than
anticipated. Contrary to popular belief, I couldn’t just tote a film crew
with me around town. Producers had to get permission from every
store, restaurant, beach, and salon in Los Angeles we wanted to film
at. Everything requires some sort of preapproval.
And what the hell would this season even be about?
Soon I realized Hef had a plan.
The second episode focused on two prospective Playmates that
were staying in the mansion’s guesthouse. After having dinner out at
Geisha House in Hollywood (where Hef had his own fried chicken



meal brought in and prepared by the mansion staff, as usual), Hef
called Bridget, Kendra, and me into his room to “talk to us.”
“I can’t promise it, but you’re going to shoot a cover and I’m going
to put you in the magazine,” Hef said. It was in many ways a defining
moment in my life. After four years living there, I was finally going to
fulfill my long-held dream of being in Playboy magazine. And he just
said it. The words fell off his tongue like the most ordinary of small
talk while standing crunched into the corner of his bedroom entry surrounded by a handful of crew members.
It was so unceremonious a delivery that we needed a moment to
process the news. We were utterly blown away. Kendra’s mouth
dropped to the floor and she appeared catatonic for a good 60
seconds. I screamed so loudly I was certain the dog I was holding had
gone deaf, and Bridget looked as though she was going to burst into
tears. This man—who had conditioned us to believe we were good
enough for his bed but not his magazine—just made our dreams come
true. It was well within his power all along, but he was finally saying
we were worthy. It was validating and exciting all at the same time.
Still, we were extremely skeptical—particularly Bridget and me.
We had been at the mansion for years and had been browbeaten to believe we just weren’t Playboy material.
In the episode, Bridget revealed through a stream of tears that she
had auditioned to be a centerfold years earlier but didn’t make the cut.
Hef had basically told her it was never going to happen.
“I’ll believe it when I see it,” Bridget said through a forced smile
during her one-on-one interview. It was a small window into what was
really going on inside Bridget’s and my heads.
Earlier in that same episode, you heard me rattle off the same
canned answer I’d given for years about whether I wanted to be in
Playboy.



“People assume that I came here wanting to be a Playmate and
that that’s my goal,” I said. “The choice is extremely clear to me. I
would much rather be Hef’s girlfriend. Hef and I are so much in love.
That’s not even a comparison to me.”
But just because I valued being Hef’s girlfriend didn’t mean I still
wasn’t dying for a pictorial! In fact, the two things had become intertwined in my mind. Since the ’50s, all of Hef’s main girlfriends had appeared inside or on the cover of Playboy—except for me. And by this
point, it was humiliating. People would always ask me why I wasn’t
featured in the magazine and I felt the need to make excuses for it by
convincing people that somehow I was special because I wasn’t. Hef
was keeping me for himself, I would explain. What else was I supposed
to say? My boyfriend thinks I’m ugly?
My shock and joy was genuine when Hef revealed that we would
be shooting for the magazine. None of us expected it, so the reactions
the cameras caught were absolutely sincere.
I’ll give the man this: he knew what made for good TV.
He also knew the importance of good timing. By allowing us to
appear in the magazine, Hef would be cashing in the biggest insurance
policy he had to keep us safely behind the mansion bars. But Hef knew
something we hadn’t yet figured out: the show was positioned to be a
runaway hit for the network, so he no longer needed the magazine as a
guarantee. He had better bait: fame.
The debut season’s arc revolved around our feature and possible
cover. It wasn’t until about halfway through season one that shooting
began for the pictorial.
Hef allowed us to choose between the two staff photographers for
our pictorial: Arny Freytag and Stephen Wayda. For years, I had seen
countless Playboy photo shoots come through Mary’s office and I had
absorbed every detail from conception to execution, from the first click



of the camera to the ink on paper. I was so excited to finally be a part
of that process myself. You would think that dating the magazine’s editor in chief would have afforded me a sort of security and confidence
before shooting the pictorial, but it was the total opposite. We couldn’t
have been any more anxious about the ordeal. We were way more
nervous than just some random girl plucked from obscurity and
thrown into a shoot. We had firsthand knowledge of just how fickle
and critical Hef could be and we were petrified that we would somehow screw it up and he would just scrap the entire pictorial. After talking to a handful of Playmates, I decided we should go with Arny. While
Stephen is an extremely talented photographer, he worked best with
more experienced models who knew how to move in front of the camera. Arny worked best with rookie models; those straight-off-the-farm
girls who needed help posing every inch of their body. When you
haven’t done much of it, modeling can be quite a clumsy sport.
Kendra, Bridget, and I needed help squeezing our three bodies into an
8.5" × 11" frame—while looking as amazing as possible.
The day of our first shoot I was absolutely ecstatic. We were told
to arrive to the mansion’s bathhouse in the morning for hair and
makeup wearing nothing but a robe and slippers (tight clothes and
shoes would leave lines on the body—and we couldn’t have that!). I
couldn’t believe I was finally getting the full Playboy beauty treatment. For years I had watched girls transform into these glamorous
creatures with the help of the expert editorial beauty team. Even with
my weekly allowance, I would have never been able to afford the
beauty team Playboy magazine used. In the early days of Hef’s seven
girlfriends, it was standard practice for the girls to call in the Playboy
glam squad before evenings out and large parties. By the time I arrived
on the scene, these were the kinds of lavish expenses that Hef had cut
back on. Sure, we would occasionally head to the salon before a red



carpet event, but we had never yet experienced the crème de la crème.
The Playboy glam squad was legendary. It comprised some of the best
artists in the industry—and they didn’t come cheap.
The ultra-talented Kimberly Ex did my hair and makeup: full,
barrel-curled platinum locks with a bronzed face, defined cheekbones,
thick black eyeliner, and carefully drawn lips. From the neck down, we
were expected to be in top physical shape. The only help we were given
in that area was some baby oil mixed with bronzing lotion to give our
skin a smooth sheen. I was over the moon with my reflection. I mean, I
actually looked like the girls on the pages of Playboy! First, we shot a
series of clothed setup shots, which included a shot of the three of us
hula hooping on the great lawn in bathing suits. It was mostly intended to warm us up before diving into the deep end (naked), but they
ended up coming out great and one of the shots was published. The
next setup had us in sexy cocktail attire standing in front of Hef’s limo
in the mansion’s main driveway. After a few minutes of shooting, Hef
appeared on set to join us for a few snaps.
How cute, I thought, he wants some behind-the-scenes shots of
our shoot for his scrapbook.
Finally, it was time to begin shooting our nudes. By that point
we’d each become considerably more relaxed in front of the camera.
As Arny positioned each of us along the rocks in the mansion’s infamous grotto, we were all laughing and goofing around. It was easily the
best time the three of us had had together in what felt like months.
When Hef came out to check on the photos, he was so happy with the
results that he added a last-minute setup for the three of us in the
bathhouse shower. It was already pretty late in the day—the shoot had
gone longer than intended—but I couldn’t get enough. The crew began
setting up a final shot, but Bridget was scheduled for school. She had a
final exam for one of her classes that she couldn’t get out of.



Apparently her professor didn’t qualify shooting a Playboy pictorial as
an acceptable reason to miss class. After a few minutes debating
whether or not she should just skip (which would have resulted in a
failing grade), Bridget dashed off to campus for her test.
Truthfully, it didn’t feel odd shooting without her. I knew they
wanted a lot of content to choose from and we still had the rest of the
week to finish our pictorial. As far as any of us knew a “Bridget/
Kendra” or a “Holly/Bridget” setup could have been on the books for
the following day. Plus, shooting with just two girls was much easier
than trying to arrange three. With wet hair and perfect makeup,
Kendra and I playfully lathered each other up with sponges and
bubbles in the tropical rock shower. Because it was one of the easiest
sequences, it resulted in some of the sexiest shots of the entire
pictorial.
The following day was hands down my favorite. The photographer
and crew buzzed around the mansion’s second floor preparing for our
individual photos. Set in each of our bedrooms, the shoots were designed to showcase our unique personalities, which was refreshing. To
reflect Bridget’s sweet and playful demeanor, her pictorial featured her
swathed in a delicate see-through negligée surrounded by plush pillows in her pink-on-pink-striped room. Kendra looked absolutely
amazing in a scrap piece of football jersey with knee-high athletic
socks and straddling a bunny head chair in her messy room (which
was tidied up substantially). My shoot was in Hef’s bedroom and was
intended to be reminiscent of old Hollywood. The beauty team styled
me like a ’40s movie star (minus the red lipstick) and the photographer draped me over an elegant wood staircase wearing nothing but a
pair of vintage peach marabou bedroom mules. It was the most beautiful I had ever felt. Like giddy schoolgirls, we snuck into each other’s
rooms to get a peek of one another’s shoot. Each setup was unique and



tailored to our personalities, so there was no competition and we were
genuinely excited for each other.
Stepping into the Playboy Studio in Santa Monica for our final
shoot was surreal. It was the very same studio I had nervously visited
with my old friend Heather years earlier. We had decided to try a
Playboy Polaroid audition, praying that we would be selected. My life
had come full circle, in a way. While the journey wasn’t quite how I
imagined it, I was arriving at the studio to shoot a cover for the
magazine.
Surveying the massive studio space, I immediately noticed that
the crew had constructed an exact replica of Hef’s bedroom for our set.
“Why didn’t we just shoot at the mansion?” I asked one of the
crew members, totally bewildered. He couldn’t produce an answer. No
one could. I suppose Hef was more inclined to waste thousands of
magazine dollars rebuilding his bedroom rather than being inconvenienced for a few hours.
Playboy photo editor Marilyn Grabowski used a page from a foreign issue of Playboy as inspiration for our first setup: three identical
brunettes piled on top of each other in bed. Throughout the sequence,
we couldn’t keep a straight face. Since none of us were ever remotely
attracted to one another, it never even crossed our minds to “act sexy.”
Posing for such a risqué shot felt incredibly awkward, but it turned out
that the laughter worked in our favor because the photos ended up
looking quite erotic.
Finally it was time to shoot our cover. Marilyn positioned each of
us on a slightly slanted bed covered in silk sheets (that she constantly
kept smoothing, draping, and switching), while Arny positioned himself on scaffolding directly above us. Because we were nude and flat on
our backs, our breasts had to be taped up to produce the amount of
cleavage needed for the cover. Contrary to the quick sequence



audiences saw, the cover shoot lasted several days. Our hyper-meticulous, Devil Wears Prada–esque photo editor kept analyzing every excruciating detail down to the placement of a single curl. She must have
changed the silk sheets from black to white to black again a hundred
times—sending the photographer into a tailspin. Despite all of it, I was
having the time of my life. The white, skylight-lit studio pulsated with
creativity energy and positivity. It was such a welcome change from
the musty atmosphere of the mansion.
“I wish I could come here every day,” I whispered to Bridget as we
lay on the slanted bed.
“I know, me too,” she said.
During our lunch break, Stephanie Morris—a junior photo editor
at that time—called us down to her office to fill out “paperwork.”
Hef hadn’t spoken to us about how much we were to be paid for
our pictorial, but we were about to find out. Rates for amateur models
start at about $25,000 per pictorial. In 2005, reality-star types were
earning roughly $40,000 to $50,000 for a pictorial. Hef’s former girlfriends the Bentley twins each received $100,000 for their cover and
pictorial years earlier. When it came to actual celebrities (like Denise
Richards, Drew Barrymore, or Cindy Crawford, for example), paydays
could be near a million dollars.
Truthfully, Hef had been so stingy with opportunities for the girlfriends to appear in the magazine that I wasn’t expecting much. At
that point, I was just grateful for the chance. For years the mansion
was hell because girls were fighting over this very opportunity—and
here I was. Not them.
When we got to her office, I quickly scanned over the release she
pushed under my nose. I didn’t think much of it until I noticed the
$25,000 fee we were each being paid for our pictorial. Since this was
technically considered a “celebrity pictorial,” part of me thought we



deserved more than the stock fee. Even something like $30,000?
Don’t get me wrong, it wasn’t the dollar figure that upset me, it was
that we were viewed as no greater a commodity than any other girl
who had walked these halls. We were simply a dime a dozen.
Still, $25,000 was the most money I’d ever had! I immediately
started planning what I would do with it. I knew I wanted to put some
in savings for the investment property I dreamed of buying—and
maybe I could use a bit to buy that Louis Vuitton travel case that I’d
been lusting over for years. It seemed like a fun way to commemorate
this major goal I had just achieved.
This is exactly what I need to get back on my feet, I thought.
Bridget had tested to be a Playmate years earlier, so she knew
what Playmates were paid and that with the growing popularity of the
show, we deserved much more than what Playboy was offering. But
she also knew there was zero point in arguing about it. She slowly put
her pen to paper and signed away the photo rights. But worse than our
bottom end of the scale pay for the pictorial was the fact that despite
being the stars of the show, Hef and the producers decided that Bridget, Kendra, and I wouldn’t receive a single dime for the first order of
The Girls Next Door. Hef would later argue that he considered our
pictorial fee our payment for season one. He clearly knew the value of
a “buy one, get one free” deal. I recall someone connected to the show
reminding us that we got “free room and board” at the mansion. This
guy clearly didn’t realize the heavy price of this “room and board”:
how restricted our freedoms were and all that was expected of us.
While the filming on the first batch of GND episodes was wrapping, Kendra had finally gathered the courage to bring the issue up
during a meeting the three of us had with the show’s highest-ranking
producers.



“Shouldn’t we like . . . be getting, like . . . paid for doing the
show?” she asked nervously. It really was a valid question and she
broached the topic in a delicate way. We were working countless
hours, opening up our private lives, and baring our bodies for public
consumption, so in her mind that was worth something. She wasn’t
being accusatory; she was just being logical.
The response she received was not what any of us were expecting
to hear.
One of the producers took a deep breath and suddenly became
very firm before spitting out slowly and methodically (so that our tiny
little brains had time to absorb this fact): “You. Are. Replaceable.”
(That would become the unofficial motto of GND for seasons to come.)
“This is not a show about the girls who live at the Playboy Mansion.
It’s about Hugh Hefner and who he chooses to date. It is not about any
of you.” We were constantly reminded that the show was Hef’s
show—our contributions were irrelevant. We were the decorative
icing, not the cake. According to our boyfriend, he could have splashed
any three blondes on screen and found instant success. This producer’s firm response quickly silenced Kendra into submission.
In the days and weeks following the photo shoot, I routinely
stalked Mary O’Connor’s office looking for the Playboy “brown book”
(a mock-up of an upcoming issue for Hef’s approval made from thick,
brown, grocery-bag-like paper). I’m a self-proclaimed super snoop, so
I spent hours lingering around her desk hoping to get a peek of our
pictorial. Eventually, my persistence paid off.
As it appeared on the show, we were all oh so naturally sitting in a
circle on the floor of Bridget’s room when Hef came in to present the
book to us. In actuality, Bridget and I spotted the book in Mary’s office
one afternoon and quickly flipped through it to get a first look at our
feature. When we finally saw it, we weren’t as thrilled as we could have



been. Physically, we looked great. The photography, lighting, and
makeup that Playboy used at the time was so flattering, very little retouching (if any) was needed. Even back then, most people assumed
that the women of Playboy were mainly a product of Photoshop, but
that wasn’t the case with most of the pictorials. Kendra would eventually request to have her labia Photoshopped out of one of the pictures
where her legs were in the air, but that was about it. Years later, Playboy would auction off that brown book, complete with Kendra’s crotch
circled in Hef’s red pen. So much for not having that out there! But it
wasn’t what we looked like that bothered us, it was which photos were
selected.
The large opening shot just so happened to be the picture of Bridget, Kendra, and me in our sexy cocktail attire with Hef plastered right
between us. Remember those brief few clicks he casually wandered into? Maybe it’s just me, but I’m not so sure men picking up the
magazine would be all that turned on by a septuagenarian man front
and center. We quickly realized that none of our individual looks had
been chosen—the one piece of the pictorial that could differentiate us
from one another. The steamiest photo in the feature was a full-page
photo of Kendra and me in the bathhouse shower. Like I said, at the
time we didn’t think anything of the extra shots, but looking at it in
context was quite different. This was one of the largest photos in the
pictorial, and it was very clearly missing one-third of our group. Needless to say, Bridget was upset. I’m certain Kendra or I would have felt
slighted as well, but Bridget had dreamed of becoming a Playmate
even longer than Kendra or I had, so she took this quite personally.
On the show, Bridget returned from class already worked up over
the shower ordeal. On camera, she confided to her sister about how
upset it made her to be excluded from the day’s final setup and



decided to speak with Hef about it. In the scene, viewers see Hef come
to comfort Bridget, who was sitting on the floor playing with her cat.
This is the exchange audiences hear:
I know, but that’s what I’m saying; everyone would
feel the same way.
HEF: Okay, okay. Absolutely. Let me see what I can do. That
isn’t exactly the toughest one to do; it’s a shower and hair.
BRIDGET: I know, but I just feel like saying something makes
me seem ungrateful, and I’m not.
HEF: Listen, I know how important all of this is to you. I’ll
figure out some kind of solution, honey.
BRIDGET:

In real reality, events didn’t play out that way. Bridget didn’t discuss the shower sequence with Hef until after we saw the brown
book—and long after the pictorial shoot had wrapped (which was why
Kendra appeared so agitated at having to shoot again). At the end of
the episode that aired, people can clearly see the two-shot of Kendra
and me in the brown book when Hef is showing it to us (the photo that
went to press was the shot of the three of us in the shower).
Bridget was sensitive about how her reaction would be perceived,
so she told producers she wished to speak to Hef off camera and asked
that they respect her privacy. The crew preferred to film everything as
it was happening, but they eventually agreed that Bridget could speak
to Hef off camera. Reality producers love to find loopholes, though.
Both Bridget and Hef were still mic’d when the conversation took
place, so the post-production crew dubbed their private dialogue over
stock footage of Bridget and Hef playing with her cat, their backs towards the cameras. Oh, the magic of Hollywood!



IN THE BEGINNING, I have to admit that I didn’t have a ton of faith in
the process. I believed that everyone was pigeonholing us into their
preconceived ideas of who we were and that audiences would see right
through the facade—or, at very least, quickly become bored.
Perhaps there’s a reason I wasn’t a reality TV producer in 2005,
because there was most definitely a method to their madness.
Nearly a million viewers tuned in to watch the premier episode of
The Girls Next Door. A million! Overnight, the show became this pop
culture sensation. The network immediately upped the order from 8 to
15 episodes for season one. Every Monday we’d receive ratings from
the previous night’s airing, and every week they were higher than the
last. Not only were audiences fascinated at getting a glimpse inside the
wondrous world of Playboy, but also at meeting Hef’s three girlfriends. Kendra, Bridget, and I wouldn’t really grasp the scope of how
major this was for years to come.
For her part, Kendra was reality TV gold—especially in 2005.
America was at the height of its obsession with dumb blondes. Paris
Hilton and Jessica Simpson were among the most famous women of
the time due to their airheaded antics on their shows The Simple Life
and Newlyweds: Nick and Jessica. On camera, Kendra was spontaneous, carefree, and brimming with those bumbling mishaps ripe for
television. And let’s just say, when it came to Kendra, none of those
dumb blonde moments ever had to be scripted.
On top of being the house cheerleader and the emotional anchor
to our trio, Bridget was also the perfect attraction for more “conservative” viewers. With a serviceman brother, an adorable teenage sister,
and deep-rooted family values (despite living at the Playboy Mansion),
she connected with Middle America.
I added some levity to the show. Despite being delusional about
my relationship with Hef, I recognized many of the absurdities of



mansion life, and audiences seemed to gravitate towards that. I could
roll my eyes along with those men and women sitting on their couch
when Hef insisted on us all embracing in a cheesy group hug or laugh
along with them at one of Kendra’s dumb blonde moments—and actually be in on the joke, instead of its punch line. Sure, it could be construed as bitchy, but it seemed to strike the right counterbalance. Plus,
there was only so much I could handle. While I loved shooting, deep
down, I still hated that this was how I had become famous.
Like a busty version of the Three Musketeers, we complemented
each other’s personalities well on camera. The initial appeal of Playboy was obvious, but what was unexpected was the audience fascination with the three of us. People came to the show for an inside look at
Hugh Hefner’s magical world, but they stayed because of Kendra,
Bridget, and me. I honestly believe the show wouldn’t have worked as
well with any other cast of characters that had lived in the mansion. If
cameras started rolling a year earlier when the Mean Girls still
haunted the hallways, I don’t think any production team could have
made those women even the least bit likable.
Towards the end of season one, upwards of 1.5 million people
were tuning in each Sunday night to see what was happening with the
three quirky blondes on Charing Cross Road—major numbers for the
network.
However, despite the show’s immense popularity, we weren’t able
to celebrate many of the positive perks of our newfound celebrity. As
usual, we remained locked behind the mansion gates, bound to our
dictator’s rules. We weren’t well known enough yet to be recognized
while simply running errands (usually in Juicy sweats and without
makeup)—especially without one another or Hef. The club nights had
slowed to a halt and we weren’t permitted to do any of our own press,
so any fan-demonium we experienced still seemed to revolve around



Playboy and Hef. I never knew we girls had fans of our own until later
into the series.
But thanks to the Internet, we were able to absorb the full scope
of the criticism that spewed from countless online haters.
In 2005, Myspace was still the most important social media site
available, and was used primarily on personal computers (who had a
smartphone back then?). These were the calm days before Facebook,
Instagram, and Twitter became national obsessions. The term “cyber
bullying” hadn’t even yet been coined. While today most people are
aware of the dangers of the anonymous taunting on social media (and
many have been victims themselves), reading truly cruel remarks
about yourself online from complete strangers was a form of self-torture that I wasn’t quite prepared to deal with.
My self-confidence was already fragile, so I took the vicious online
attacks far more personally than I should have. Gold diggers, whores,
sluts, stupid . . . we were called everything I had always feared I would
be called for being a part of this group. When I would stumble upon a
message board discussing The Girls Next Door, not only did I feel
hated but also completely isolated. Even though Kendra and Bridget
received equally as brutal commentary from these miserable trolls hiding behind their computers, there’s something very lonely about being
a battering ram for a group of hateful people. And absolutely nothing
was sacred. Even those physical qualities I did feel secure with were
subject to public ridicule (I love my big eyes, but ruthless haters
labeled them “reptilian”).
I was hyperaware of the public perception of Hef’s harem of
blondes, so part of me was convinced that Kendra, Bridget, and I were
a total laughingstock. While promoting the show in New York, we were
invited to be guests on the ABC daytime talk show The View. A producer placed Hef on a chair and strategically organized the three of us to



perch around him. It was uncomfortable and awkward, but we were
new to the game and wanted to be amenable. As soon as the cameras
started rolling, Barbara Walters asked the three of us, “Do you always
sit like this?” As if it had been our inane idea. In case I had somehow
managed to drift off into blissful ignorance, Barbara Walters was there
to remind us of how ridiculous we all appeared—and what a joke we
were. Bridget and I wanted to crawl inside our own bodies and die. But
Kendra . . . she just responded in an episode of GND that the hosts
were all “haters” who needed boob jobs.
JUST A FEW MONTHS after the final episode of our first season aired, E!
renewed GND for a second season. The premier of the second season
would end up scoring a three-year ratings high for the network. In a
way, I got what I had wished for. The fame for fame’s sake I had grown
to desire was now mine. It didn’t make me happy, though. It was the
emptiest kind of fame, not gained by producing quality work, but by
being a curiosity: one of Hugh Hefner’s three girlfriends.
During the filming of season one, a Playmate named Kara Monaco
had come to live across the street from the mansion at the Bunny
House. Kara and I had become close friends over the year and she
even made quite a few cameos throughout the first season of the show.
When 2006 rolled in, Kara was bestowed the highest honor a Playmate can receive: “Playmate of the Year.” She was on the cover of the
June 2006 issue and featured in a gorgeous Cinderella-themed
pictorial. Of course I was beyond happy for my friend, but I was also
melancholy. Not only was a friend moving away, but her success reminded me of the dreams I had had when I moved in five years earlier.
As Playmate of the Year, Kara would be graduating from the mansion



and traveling the world for appearances and promotions. She was
moving on with her life, in the same way I had once hoped to do.
At 27 years old, I felt positively ancient. It didn’t help that with
every batch of Playmate test shoots that trickled through Mary’s office,
I’d see memos on certain photos denoting a girl who was deemed
“older.” “She’s 28” was always something the Chicago photo editor (a
male contemporary of Hef’s) had to point out as if a prospective candidate was at death’s door. After 28, according to them, a girl might as
well put herself out to pasture.
As production crews rolled back in to shoot season two, I reluctantly decided I would do my best to accept my lot in life and aspire to
one day be the only girlfriend at the mansion. After all, that is ultimately what I wanted. Wasn’t it?

CHAPTER 9

“It’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life!
I do wonder what can have happened to me!”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

A

s The Girls Next Door continued on to season two, everything got
. . . well, better. Filming occupied most of our days, so our evenings
were pretty quiet. With all the attention Hef was receiving from the
show, his ego was fully satisfied. He felt both famous and relevant
again, and therefore didn’t need to drag us out to nightclubs twice a
week so the “adoring public” could ogle him. That was a huge relief for
me. Not only was I sick of nightclubbing and drinking, but with the
club nights now off the schedule, the post-club bedroom ritual also
went out the window. It was definitely an unexpected bonus. It was
the first time Hef’s girlfriends could say “we don’t sleep with him” and
it would actually be true. Surprisingly, even though sex was out of the
equation, Hef seemed happier than ever. I guess there is something
Hugh Hefner loves more than sex, and that’s fame.
Needless to say, for me, sex was never the highlight of the relationship. I was more than happy now that our evenings were spent
eating dinner in bed while watching The Sopranos or with Hef fretting



over a Sudoku puzzle while I did a crossword. We were like a typical
old married couple. The only difference was, only one of us was actually old.
For a time, the show’s success really bolstered spirits at the mansion. The three of us girls were now getting paid for being on the reality TV hit and could finally start saving up some real money. Playboy,
as a brand, was hotter than ever. We were on our way to achieving that
long-desired harmony among the girlfriends. GND had become a project we bonded over. Many of the plotlines became memorable common experiences, and the times the episodes would spotlight our individualities made us feel special.
During season one, we visited Bridget’s hometown, Lodi, California. It was so cool, getting to see her and her family in their “natural
habitat,” i.e., outside of the mansion. We visited Kendra’s hometown
of San Diego as well. She and her family went out of their way to make
us feel at home. Kendra even coordinated a fun tour of her favorite
spots and showed us her old home videos. Although, I have to admit,
watching Hef fawn over her childhood videos and threatening to take
one home made me really uncomfortable. When you’re 80 years old
and dating a trio of 20-somethings, you already look like a dirty old
man. He didn’t need to give viewers any more ammunition.
For me, the last episode of season one was really special. We visited the Palms casino in Las Vegas where they were readying the new
Playboy Club, set to open the following year. Knowing what a fan I was
of the Bunny costume and of Roberto Cavalli (who had designed the
new Bunny ensembles for the club), Playboy PR tapped me to model
one of the new prototypes in a fashion show (along with several Playmates). Not only was I able to wear this amazing costume, but I was
able to do it without the other two girlfriends. It was one of those



small instances where I could feel like I was my own person. I savored
the moment and it became one of my all-time favorite episodes.
Less than a year after our first magazine appearance, Hef ordered
our second pictorial and cover for the September 2006 issue. The cover would be on stands as season two premiered—and I even got to develop the concept! I sketched the idea out on a cocktail napkin while at
a Dodgers game. Taking the notion of “the girl next door” literally, the
cover showed the three of us peeking through a white window with
frilly drapes—and it became the first time the magazine photographed
a corresponding back cover (which, naturally, was a view of our butts
as we were peeking out the window). Both images were shot simultaneously to ensure continuity. And while this time we were finally able to
star in individually themed shoots, it was mandated that the other two
girls appear in the background of each. We still felt frustrated that Hef
seemed to think we were only worthwhile as a threesome, but it turned
out that casting us as a team wasn’t making us jealous and turning us
against each other; instead it was turning us into a team in real life.
Just like the first shoot, we had a blast modeling together. Being
in the magazine was a dream come true for all of us, so being able to
do it again was icing on the cake. But just like the first time around,
Bridget’s emotions started to get the better of her. She began to feel
like the photo editor, Marilyn, was singling her out and nitpicking
every detail. If there was a hair out of place, it was Bridget’s. If
someone needed to move, it was Bridget. It kept up like this for most
of the shoot. Eventually Bridget reached a breaking point and needed
to take a moment in the makeup room. Surprisingly, Kendra went in
to comfort her and put her in a better mood. I couldn’t have imagined
that happening a year earlier, when things had been more strained
between the three of us. We had made huge progress with our
friendships.



Other changes were afoot as well. Prior to the show, we’d almost
never traveled—Hef was a creature of habit who despised any sort of
variation from his routine. Once he finds a comfortable one, he’s
bound to stick with it for at least the next few decades. So when we
learned that the second season would see us not only on multiple trips
to Las Vegas, but also on a two-week-long European getaway, we were
flabbergasted. Paris, London, Cannes, Barcelona, Munich, Rome . . .
for us, it was unheard of!
It was on these trips that Bridget and I finally found something we
had in common with Kendra: we all loved sightseeing. The three of us
were very different, but we all came from working-class backgrounds.
I think at one point we each believed that moving into the mansion
would give us the opportunity to see the world, but the truth is, we
rarely left our neighborhood. After a while, we gave up hope that we
would ever travel. Now that Hef knew the world was watching, he had
to be the “playboy” everyone believed he was. We were finally getting
the experience we thought we had signed up for!
It was the opportunity of a lifetime, to be able to travel around the
world in style, so we didn’t waste a single minute. From Pompeii to the
Paris catacombs, Bridget and I were checking things off our bucket
lists left and right! Kendra said she felt like she was finally learning
about history for the first time, in a way that made it feel real. The
three of us were up at the crack of dawn, trying to pack in as many outings as we could before Hef finally rolled out of bed and started his day
(usually after noon). He would join us for a few of the landmarks
(mostly for filming purposes), but he was more interested in doing
press and attending parties in his honor than in seeing the sights.
The second season rounded out by celebrating my and Hef’s fiveyear anniversary. Bridget set up a dinner party in the living room,
transforming it into a replica of one of my favorite restaurants, The



Melting Pot, complete with their signature fondue pots. I couldn’t believe five years had passed since I moved into the mansion—a half decade of my life had been sucked into the Playboy vortex.
“I think a lot of people would look at being together for five years
as a turning point,” I said to the interview camera, an empty smile on
my lips. “But I know it’s not a turning point for us because I know
nothing is going to change in this relationship any time soon.”
When we all gathered around the table for our anniversary dinner
(because it could never be just the two of us), I presented Hef with the
sort of sap-filled greeting card he adored. I’d even scribbled the pet
name “Puffin” across the top. As he read it aloud, I burst into tears.
Hef put his arm around me and gave me a kiss on the head. He was
positively glowing! Not only was he surrounded by a bevy of beauties,
the cameras were also there to catch this public display of affection.
I tried to play off my outburst as having been touched by the romantic moment (and I think most people bought it!), but in reality I
was crying because of what a farce this whole thing was and how
stretched thin my nerves were at that moment. Hef reading off the
flowing words of love from the card reminded me again what a joke
this whole situation was and made me feel like I had missed out on my
chance to ever have anything real with someone; to ever meet a man
who really deserved a card like that. I had sold my soul to the devil and
felt that there was no way out.
As the show continued to grow in popularity, we became more
and more valuable to both the network and the brand. We even got to
have a tiny bit more say in what kinds of things we filmed.
“DO YOU LIKE IT?” shouted a network exec, referring to the holidaythemed episode we had just seen a cut of called “There’s Snow Place



Like Home.” The mansion was in utter chaos as E! executives, along
with a few hundred other of our nearest and dearest, descended onto
the grounds to celebrate E!’s upcoming season, which consisted of the
season three premiere of GND and the premiere of Ryan Seacrest’s
first produced series, Paradise City.
“Yeah, I think it’s really fun,” I replied, with a big smile as the
party buzzed on around us. “People are going to love it!” I had been
angling for a Christmas episode since season one, but the producers
had always refused. Holidays were a big part of mansion culture and
one of the few breaks from the otherwise monotonous life there, so we
looked forward to these large-scale events.
Historically, seasonal episodes hadn’t performed well in reruns,
which the network ran a lot of. During those years, you couldn’t turn
on E! for more than a few hours before bumping into the three of us,
and the execs understandably didn’t want to air a Christmas episode in
July.
Just then, Hef appeared next to me. Seacrest had arrived and network execs and upper management were clamoring for his attention.
Earlier that year, Seacrest agreed to a hyper-lucrative megadeal with
the network and was quickly christened E!’s resident Golden Boy.
Hef grumbled under his breath, something about how E! would
never have been able to afford Ryan if GND hadn’t been so successful,
before shuffling off towards a nearby table, expecting me to follow.
Hef had become obsessed with the show. When GND was first
ordered, he wasn’t particularly eager to make many appearances.
“This way, Daddy doesn’t have to do the work!” he guffawed at the
press when they would ask him why he decided to do a reality show
that centered around his girlfriends. He also described reality shows
as “dumb and a waste of time.”



His tune changed as soon as he realized just how popular the
show had become. Suddenly it became imperative that Hef have a substantial scene in every episode. If he saw a rough cut of an episode and
wasn’t happy with the amount of screen time he was getting, we were
called back to re-film scenes in a manner that would include him
more. Even when we shot entire episodes off the mansion grounds, we
were obligated to call home on camera, so the show could cut back to
what Hef was doing back at the mansion. Not surprisingly, it usually
involved him spending time with other women. At the end of the day,
the producers were right. It was Hef’s show.
By the time we began filming on season three, my attitude
changed when it came to our little reality program: I was finally fully
embracing it. I had been skeptical of how the series would affect my
life. But by the time the network ordered a third season, even I had to
admit that we had a hit on our hands. I started to see the show as an
opportunity. It was an excuse to travel, to go outside the mansion
gates and try new things. Also, I was starting to realize that being on a
reality show brings a little magic with it. People are more willing to
give you a chance when you are on TV, even if it’s on the silliest of
reality shows. I was beginning to sense that I might be able to get
something bigger out of this, even if that something was confined to
the world of Playboy.
That season, we were finally able to film in December and capture
my birthday (Kendra’s and Bridget’s birthdays had both been covered
twice over the previous two seasons). Birthday episodes were important to each of us, because it was another opportunity to feel special
and to be portrayed as individuals. I think being able to feel like our
own person from time to time made us all feel a little less insecure,
which allowed us to come together as friends more and more. Even a



silly activity like horseback riding helped us bond and, indirectly,
ended up having a big influence on my life.
The show’s producers found Sunset Ranch in the Hollywood Hills,
offering horseback rides over the hills into Burbank and back to Hollywood. For the episode called “May the Horse Be with You” we drove
up Beachwood Drive and passed through an old stone gateway into a
quiet area populated with adorable storybook-style cottages. I had
never seen houses so cute. They looked like one of the seven dwarves
was going to pop out of one of the doors at any given moment.
What is this place? I thought.
I would later learn that the area was developed as a community
called Hollywoodland (that’s where the famous Hollywood sign comes
from) and each house was built to look as if it came straight out of a
fairy tale. I didn’t know it then, but I would find myself returning to
that neighborhood quite regularly five years later.
The episode that marked the most immediate change for me,
however, was definitely the one called “My Bare Lady,” which focused
on me interning under Marilyn Grabowski at Playboy Studio West.
Despite dating the boss, I didn’t find the internship that easy for me to
secure.
Prior to the start of each new season, the three of us girls would
meet with producers to discuss the coming months and potential plotlines they could follow. The producers needed to know what we had
going on in our lives so they could decide what they wanted to film.
Even though reality shows capture “reality,” there still needs to be a
storyline to follow. Filming us watching TV or reading doesn’t exactly
make riveting television. So we would gather around the mansion’s
dining room table, pencils and day planners in hand, listing off our
plans and goals for the next few months. The producers would throw
around ideas with us and would eventually let us know what had been



decided: what we would film, when it would be done, and sometimes
even how the things we caught on camera would fit into upcoming
plotlines. Every once in a while we would film an activity, not really
knowing where it would end up. Those types of things often ended up
in what they called “Frankenstein episodes.” For example: me buying
an exotic bird as a gift for Hef, Kendra consulting a “pet psychic,” and
Bridget taking her dog to get an agent were intercut to create a pet
themed episode.
In several of the meetings, I’d campaigned for a Playboy internship under Marilyn Grabowski, the photo editor at Studio West. I
knew this was never an opportunity Hef would give to me ordinarily,
but I thought that if it was something chronicled for the show than he
might actually let me give it a whirl.
At the time, we had already shot two pictorials for the magazine
and I absolutely loved being at the studio. The idea of working on set
with the models and being a part of the decision making really spoke
to me—I was desperate for some sort of creative outlet. Marilyn was
responsible for coming up with ideas and themes for shoots, doing the
art direction, and choosing the best photos to send to Playboy’s Chicago offices for layout design. After spending years admiring all of the
Playmate proofs routed through Mary’s office, reading the memos
back and forth between editors, and seeing the final selects for the
magazine, I felt like I had developed an eye for the process. On the occasions the executive producer pitched the idea to Hef he turned it
down. (Hef was never in our plotline brainstorming sessions; he would
be consulted afterwards.) No reason was ever relayed back to me—just
that it didn’t get approved. I was too timid to ask Hef about it myself,
particularly with the knowledge that he had already shot it down.
I was so frustrated, always hearing “no, no, no!”



“It’s the one idea I’m really excited about and he keeps turning it
down!” I complained to Bridget one day while I was lounging in her
room. Not only was I the quietest, least outgoing cast member, but my
interests overlapped with Bridget’s so much that I found it difficult to
find plot ideas for myself. There were so few things that felt unique to
me and were also within the boundaries of what Hef would let me do. I
was starting to lose patience.
As she set about organizing a pile of craft supplies, she told me
she had actually heard something about it. Sitting cross-legged on her
poufy pink round bed, she and I had been discussing ideas for the upcoming season and I’d once again mentioned my favorite plot idea.
Bridget went on to tell me that Hef didn’t want to tell me no on camera
if the work wasn’t good enough. Hef said he wasn’t going to approve
something just because I worked on it.
“That’s FINE!” I replied, exasperated. “I don’t want him to publish my work if it isn’t good enough! I want to learn! Plus, being able
to tell me no on camera would make good drama for the show!”
Bridget started laughing her infectious laugh. “I know,” she blurted out. “That’s what I was thinking!”
Despite being addicted to drama in real life, Hef was adamant
that no real drama or “negativity” play out on the show. We were to be
depicted as a happy family, blissfully sharing our boyfriend at all
times. I believe, because Playboy and his lifestyle were controversial
enough, that he wanted to prove to everyone that things were always
just peachy inside the mansion. The network and the producers would
have liked a little drama (anyone does when making a reality show),
but Hef wouldn’t have it, hence not wanting to tell me no on camera.
The irony was, of course, that he had done so (and sometimes cruelly)
many, many times in real life. He wanted to be portrayed as the best



boyfriend ever, which meant he acted quite different on camera than
off. In the world of GND, you ONLY saw his good side.
A season later, after the producers and I brought up the idea for
the millionth time, Hef finally relented and let me give the internship a
try. In order to secure the internship, I was charged with finding a potential Playmate candidate suitable for the magazine and bringing the
photos to Hef for review. I instantly remembered meeting an adorable
Puerto Rican girl that Playmate Colleen Shannon had introduced to
me at an autograph signing—my first job was to track her down! When
I finally found a photo of her to show Hef, he approved her as a candidate. Tamara Sky would soon become 2007’s “Miss August,” and her
Playmate shoot would mark my first official gig as a Playboy photo
intern.
Marilyn graciously welcomed me into the studio. She introduced
me to Stephen Wayda, who would be shooting Tamara’s pictorial, and
walked me through proof editing for the Miss June shoot. With great
patience and care, she pointed out all the elements that make a great
centerfold—and exactly what it took in order to get Hef’s approval.
I was still trying to figure that one out! I thought, laughing to
myself.
It didn’t take long before Studio West became my home away
from home. In fact, I think I felt more like myself at the studio than I
ever had at the mansion. Away from Hef’s critical eye, I relaxed and
grew into my new role. Having the internship gave me a sense of great
pride. The photographers and staffers were an invaluable part of the
experience, teaching me everything I needed to know. I couldn’t believe I was actually getting centerfolds approved! I had been hearing
for years that Hef was so picky, it sometimes took weeks to get a finished centerfold. Not only did I enjoy the job, as it turns out, I was actually good at it, too! Between my nine-to-five at the studio and all the



editing homework I was bringing back to the mansion with me, I
ended up spending most of my time on the job, and I wouldn’t have
had it any other way!
When Marilyn retired, I was promoted from intern and given an
actual job, with the title Junior Photo Editor. I was assigned to the upcoming Playmate shoots, and since I was the first editor to focus entirely on the Playmate of the Month feature, eventually I was given the
title Playmate Editor.
I was finally starting to feel like I had a purpose, like I had some
use in the Playboy world. I wasn’t just one of Hef’s numerous blond
bimbos. My confidence grew for the first time since I had moved into
the mansion. This job did for me what starring in a reality television
show and becoming known worldwide didn’t do: it made me feel good
about myself. Having responsibilities, new skills to learn, and a creative outlet allowed me to slowly start coming alive again.
Over the course of The Girls Next Door, we would pose for two
more covers (besides November 2005 and September 2006) and three
GND calendars, which I took upon myself to direct and edit. The Girls
Next Door projects weren’t a part of my Studio West job in any way
(on the clock, I handled only Playmate projects), but because I’m ambitious, love a good project, and wanted some kind of say in how I was
portrayed, I took the helm of some of our shoots anyway and no one
protested. The March 2008 “Sexiest Celebrities” cover was an outtake
from a concept I developed with the three of us perched inside a
bunny-shaped constellation. Apparently fans of the show were enjoying my photo editor storyline, and production decided to spend more
time with me in the studio. Some viewers probably thought my job was
fake and only for the TV program. One E! executive even congratulated our executive producer for making me look “credible on that
job,” which I found insulting, to say the least. Most people only knew



me as a reality TV bimbo, so I guess it’s not surprising that many
people assumed I couldn’t handle a real job. But the only time I ever
may have appeared involved in a shoot when I wasn’t was when a production team asked me to pop by the Playboy shoot Kim Kardashian
was filming for Keeping Up with the Kardashians. I didn’t have anything to do with her pictorial, since it was a celebrity shoot and not a
Playmate feature.
Sneaking in a little creative say over our projects was a major outlet for me. Not everyone had that sort of outlet, though. As girlfriends,
the three of us were to be seen and not heard. Never were we permitted to express any sort of discontent with Hef or mansion life. As
Kendra’s star began to rise, she became more confident, independent
. . . and vocal. Bridget and I had been through so much by the time
Kendra had arrived on the scene that we were already preconditioned
to be afraid to ask for anything. But Kendra wasn’t afraid, and as a result was granted a little more freedom. Her fearlessness certainly let
Hef know that if she didn’t get her way she would be out the door. Of
course, granting one of the girlfriends some perks that the others
didn’t get played into his manipulative games as well. She was the only
one of us allowed to have an outside agent, who booked her for a few
club appearances. But like all things at the mansion, her added benefits came at a cost. She was no longer new and novel enough to be
completely safe from Hef’s belittling ways. Just like he’d done with me
for years, he began chipping away at her confidence, slowly but surely.
“You have a little overbite,” Hef pointed out to Kendra while
shooting an episode for season three. Kendra had dressed up as Mae
West for one of our calendar photos, an obvious bid to win Hef’s affections by emulating an old Hollywood star.



“What . . . ?” Kendra laughed nervously, obviously embarrassed,
looking straight into the camera for some kind of help as Hef went
about his business.
It happened off camera, too. During a limo ride to an event, on a
day when we weren’t filming, the four of us sat quietly in the vehicle as
it battled the L.A. traffic. Hef, for whatever reason, decided to have a
go at her:
“You know, Kendra,” he said out of the blue, “it looks like you are
putting on some weight.” He then went on to talk about how she
should watch what she eats at the buffets.
Oh my God! Did he really just say that? Kendra was athletic and
never, ever did she need to lose weight. Bridget and I pretended not to
hear his cruel remark, hoping that ignoring it would make it less satisfying an insult for Hef and less embarrassing for Kendra. In retrospect, I know I should have said something to stick up for her, but I
was way too scared to stand up to Hef in any way. He frightened me.
Kendra and I might have had our differences, but the show had
turned out to be a really positive thing for our relationship, and in that
moment, my heart broke for her. I stared out the window, wishing I
was anyplace but the back of that limo. To her credit, she didn’t yell or
cry; she took it on the chin. When we arrived at the party, Kendra was
uncharacteristically reserved for the remainder of the evening, the
wind quite visibly taken out of her sails.
In many ways, the playing field had been leveled since she joined
the group three years earlier. The show gave us all a common ground
and Kendra was now no stranger to the insults, tantrums, and guilt
trips (complete with fake tears) that Bridget and I had been dealing
with for a number of years. It was now the three of us girls against the
world, instead of us against each other.

CHAPTER 10

“I can’t help it,” said Alice very meekly: “I’m
growing.”
“You have no right to grow here,” said the
Dormouse.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

I

think a jewelry line would be really cute,” I suggested to Darlene,
one of the Playboy licensing department associates. The show’s ratings were high and growing, so it dawned on Playboy to begin merchandising it—and the girlfriends—to increase profits and capitalize
on its popularity before it was too late. They asked Darlene and some
other licensing execs to come speak with the three of us.
“They should be specific to our lifestyle shown on TV,” I continued. “Charm bracelets are really popular, so how about one with cute
charms like a tiny dog, a champagne bottle, a jet . . .” I began doodling
the design on one of the HMH (for Hugh Marston Hefner) monogrammed notepads placed around the dining room table.
“That’s a really great idea,” she exclaimed, watching me draw the
little trinkets on a large link bracelet. “Wow, you can actually draw.”



At the time, the licensing department was one of the star moneymaking divisions of Playboy Enterprises. Playboy clothing and accessories had been popular ever since Sarah Jessica Parker wore a
gold rabbit head necklace on an episode of Sex and the City.
And, for the first time ever, the show was single-handedly guiding
Playboy into, dare I say, almost family-friendly, mainstream status.
Our show was packaged in such a way that, believe it or not, many
adults were watching it with their kids. The series, though loaded with
sexual innuendo, was so colorful and cartoony that it almost felt more
Scooby-Doo than sexy. GND merchandise was a natural integration.
However, Playboy licensing was extremely cautious not to directly associate any one product with The Girls Next Door in order to avoid
owing any sales percentages to the network (save for the GND book,
calendar, and the bobblehead dolls, all of which were things I pushed
to make happen).
Playboy accessories were already big sellers online, through the
catalogue and in boutiques, so I figured jewelry was the smartest fit for
our first collaboration. Together with Playboy’s jewelry manufacturer,
I created my capsule collection consisting of earrings, necklaces, and
bracelets.
When the show was at the height of its popularity, so was the Vegas renaissance—and it quickly became a popular destination for us on
the series. If we were married to the mansion, then Las Vegas was our
mistress. The Playboy Club inside the Palms Casino Resort opened in
October 2006, and shortly after, Playboy licensing had the brilliant
idea (no sarcasm, it actually was pretty good) to create Girls Next
Door slot machines. We were made aware of the project and expected
to be thrilled at the honor alone. No one mentioned any sort of compensation for use of our likeness or any percentage on the back end.
We were really excited about the idea, nonetheless. Who wouldn’t get



a kick out of seeing their faces on a slot machine? We simply didn’t
realize that we should be getting a fee for such a thing.
By this time, Bridget, Kendra, and I had signed on with a management company. Hef had worked closely with this company in the past
and had made friends with the owner, so I suppose he didn’t feel too
threatned by us “branching out” in this way.
Hef kept us aggressively sheltered and any press we were allowed
to do was preapproved by Playboy public relations and only done if it
promoted the brand, the show, or Hef specifically. Nothing spotlighting us as individuals was ever given the green light. For example, Hef
refused to let me try to compete in the first season of Celebrity Apprentice, because he didn’t want me to go to New York for a few
weeks, but “coincidentally” a Playmate of the Year he was eager to promote landed the spot instead.
For the most part, we chose our battles and did as Hef requested
when it came to our careers, but the slot machine idea struck a chord.
“No way,” an acquaintance of mine told me over the phone one afternoon. “I’m going to look into this. Slot machines are big money, Holly.
They’re planning on using your names and likenesses. They have to
pay you for that.”
Shortly after the licensing department was approached about
compensating us, the slot machine plans came to a grinding halt. It
seemed insane to abandon it altogether, but it was never brought up
again. Either there were too many hands in the pot to make it profitable or no one wanted to concede that we should be paid for the use of
our names and likenesses. God forbid they open up a can of worms by
making us feel important or put enough money in our pockets to feel
independent!
My last attempt at foraying into the world of Playboy licensing
was a pitch for Bridget, Kendra, and me to create swimwear lines—an



idea they were initially enthusiastic about. They immediately green-lit
the project and I began designing my collection. It went far enough into development that samples of all of my designs were manufactured.
But one day, without any explanation, the project was shut down.
Bridget, Kendra, and I were so used to defeat by this point, we didn’t
even question the decision. It was never mentioned again until one
day I noticed the Playboy catalog on Mary’s desk. I spun it around to
face me and gasped.
There she was: a sultry Sara Underwood lying across the cover in
a sleek, sophisticated black monokini with a tiny gold Playboy logo beneath the belly button.
“What the fuck?” I whispered under my breath. That was my
design! Did Playboy licensing actually go ahead and manufacture and
sell my design without even letting me know? Sure, it could have been
a mistake, since the same manufacturers that made the Playboy line
made the GND samples, and maybe Playboy even had the legal right to
use my ideas this way, but it still made me feel like dirt. It wasn’t about
the lack of compensation. It was about feeling owned, like I was Playboy’s personal property and could be walked all over like a doormat. I
didn’t even bother confronting anyone about it, because I knew it
would be a losing battle. It definitely made me question my loyalty to
the brand, though.
As GND went into its fourth season, I finally had the opportunity
to take Bridget and Kendra to my hometown. We visited Bridget’s and
Kendra’s respective hometowns in the first two seasons and I had been
lobbying to take the girls to Alaska for quite some time. Needless to
say, it was a little more expensive to get to Alaska than to Lodi or San
Diego, so it took a little time for production to come around. Hef even
tried to throw a wrench in the plans when he made it clear that of all
the places he had never wanted to go, Alaska topped the list.



We were finally able to make the trip, along with my mom and
dad (Hef stayed home, of course). I loved taking the girls to Craig, the
tiny town I grew up in, and to Ketchikan, the nearest city, where my
family and I used to go when we needed to buy something that Craig
couldn’t offer (there were only a handful of stores in Craig). Bouncing
back and forth between islands on the tiny Otter plane was an adventure in itself. Our plane broke down midair and the pilot had to make
an emergency landing. This was one time Kendra was really afraid of
flying. She had to have a few drinks before getting on our return flight.
Alaska is rugged and not for everyone, so I appreciated that the
girls were enthusiastic about the trip and made the effort to have a
good time. The episode turned out to be my favorite of the entire
series. One shot in particular stands out in my mind. The three of us
took a moment to quietly swing on a swing set while the camera shot
us from the ground, three dandelions of varying height echoing our
three figures in the foreground. It seemed like such an innocent moment, and the whole episode captured us as ordinary, real people, not
as the “Mansion Mistress” cartoon characters we usually played on TV.
Later that season, the cameras returned to Studio West with me
for an episode titled “Go West Young Girl.” In the process of finding a
Playmate for the upcoming September issue, I invited four candidates
out to test for the slot. There was a brunette named Melanie from San
Diego, raven-haired Valerie Mason from Louisiana, platinum blond
Kayla Collins from Pennsylvania, and a quirky 18-year-old from Las
Vegas named Angel Porrino.
Not only was I thrilled to have an episode focus so much on the
job I had grown to love, I made new friends and even found a few
Playmates in the process. Valerie Mason, with her classically cute face,
would end up being chosen as Miss September. Kayla, surprisingly,
was turned down by Hef for “looking too much like too many other



Playmates.” Hey, at least he was starting to appreciate variety! Kayla
ended up becoming Miss August 2008 after Hef’s friends made a fuss
over her when he screened the GND episode for them.
My favorite candidate was Angel Porrino. She had an electric personality and the most fun sense of humor. People couldn’t stop laughing when they hung out with her, especially me. I’d never had a friend
I’d laughed so hard with. Along with German Playmate Giuliana
Marino, we became an inseparable trio, hanging out and goofing off
whenever I had free time. Hef didn’t end up selecting Angel as a Playmate and I was very sad to see her go when it was time for her to return home.
My sister’s wedding made up two episodes of season four: “Jamaican Me Crazy” and “Wedding Belles.” I was surprised when my sister said yes to the idea of The Girls Next Door covering her wedding,
but since she had planned a very small destination wedding in Jamaica, it turned out that she thought it would be a great way to share
the celebration with all of her friends that couldn’t be there.
Bridget, Kendra, and I couldn’t have had a better time. For
whatever reason, Hef wasn’t interested in attending, but I can’t imagine his cranky, high-maintenance personality in laid-back Jamaica
anyway. The three of us girls had an amazing few days at Sandals
Negril, relaxing, zip-lining, and exploring with my family. There was
no drama, just a truly memorable trip and a beautiful beach wedding.
I was the maid of honor, my sister looked stunning, and my family and
two closest girlfriends were as happy as could be. Who could ask for
anything more?
Playboy could. Just before filming was set to begin on season five,
there was a mad rush to get Bridget, Kendra, and me under contract.
Prior to the first episode of the series, we had each signed the most basic of television releases—and nothing more.



Realizing that the stars of this hit show were theoretically free to
walk away and pursue other television opportunities at any time,
someone must have panicked. Unbeknownst to us, Hef arranged to
have us contracted under Alta Loma (Playboy’s production company),
which basically meant that we would have a talent agreement binding
us to Hugh Hefner. Letting us negotiate directly with the network was
never going to be an option, probably because it meant he would have
had to relinquish too much control over his girlfriends. After all, what
if E! offered us something greater than being one of Hugh Hefner’s
blond bimbos? As I understood it, the network was willing to work
with us in this fashion as long as Alta Loma could show they had us
under contract, and fast.
It all happened so quickly, I can’t even remember how I initially
heard about the contract. What I do recall is getting really worked up
and marching down to the master bedroom to tell Hef I had no intention of signing.
“I think it’s in bad taste to sign a contract to be your girlfriend,” I
maintained. Given that the show was about “Hef and who he is dating,” as opposed to any of the three of us (as they liked to remind us
regularly), I felt signing a contract with him was taking away my option of walking away from the relationship at any time. It would be
just another facet of this relationship that would make me feel like a
hooker. “It’s just weird.”
“I understand the notion, but it’s important to me that you sign
it,” he said, looking at me with sad puppy dog eyes. “If you care about
me, you’ll do it.”
In the end, it was always about Hef. Quietly, I did my best to consider my options. I didn’t want to be coerced into doing anything else
for this man.



Sensing my hesitation, and realizing that my heartstrings might
not convince me, Hef decided to appeal to my business sense, telling
me that if we didn’t all sign, the network might not order another
season.
As further encouragement, Hef had told me Bridget already
signed her contract, but I didn’t learn until afterwards that she did so
completely against her better judgment. As a reasonable person
would, Bridget asked to have some time to have her lawyers look over
the paperwork but was denied. I imagine she was given the trademark
mansion attitude: “If you don’t like it, you can leave.” Begrudgingly,
she signed the contract.
“Okay,” I finally relented. “I’ll look at it, but I want you to know, I
don’t like this.”
“I understand,” Hef said, unable to contain his smile. He didn’t
care what the hell I thought, as long as I walked my butt down to the
office and signed those papers.
Still in my pajamas, I trudged down to Mary’s office at the other
end of the mansion. Without saying a word, I sat myself in the chair
next to her desk and started playing with her white Maltese pup
named Miss Kitty.
“So,” Mary started, looking over the top of her small-framed eyeglasses. “Did Hef tell you about the contracts?”
“Yes,” I grumbled, before pleading my case. “And I’m not thrilled
about it. I think it’s wrong.”
Mary sat in silence with her arms folded, allowing me my few moments to vent.
“Because the show is about Hef’s girlfriends, I feel like I’m signing
a contract to be in a relationship,” I whined. I was beyond frustrated. I
had my back against the ropes. If I wanted to move forward with the
show for a fifth season, I had to bind myself to Hef’s production



company. What if I wanted to move out? Or do another show? I felt
like this contract might make that impossible.
“That’s not really what it’s about, Holly,” Mary reassured me, her
voice smooth and calm. “E! is just hesitant to move forward with the
show if their talent isn’t under any kind of contract. That’s all.”
“I know, but . . .” I allowed my voice to trail off. I’d already had the
same argument with Hef and it wasn’t going to result in any different
outcome with Mary. I fell silent for a few moments before asking, “Do
they have to be signed today?”
“Yes,” Mary said very matter-of-factly. “They need them back
today.”
“Why did we get them so last minute, then?” I asked, my anxiety
starting to escalate again. “We don’t even have time to look them
over!”
“The contracts are with Alta Loma, dear,” Mary went on, sidestepping any explanation as to why we were just now receiving them. “You
know if there’s a problem, Hef will release you from it.”
But would he? I know that in Mary’s heart, she sincerely thought
that Hef was a good man—just as I believed at the time. But a nagging
voice in the back of my head kept warning me not to trust this
situation.
If signing this contract was really so important to everyone, I decided to just get it over with. I knew that ultimately I had no choice.
Hef would find a way to corner me into signing it, so I might as well
just save myself any further aggravation.
“Fine, “I said, grabbing a pen on Mary’s desk. “Where do I sign?”
I scribbled my name on the contract that Mary nonchalantly
shoved under my nose and handed it back to her.
“Now . . . what to do about the Kendra problem,” Mary continued.



Kendra was in the Dominican Republic for a paid nightclub appearance, so she could hardly sign the paperwork by E!’s alleged deadline. But Hef and his team must have found some kind of solution, if
all three of our signed contracts were indeed delivered to E! that
afternoon.
I can’t say this with certainty since I never witnessed pen to paper,
but the gossip around the mansion was that someone on Hef’s staff
must have had to forge Kendra’s contract in order to meet the network’s deadline. Of course it’s also possible that E! never even gave
Hef a deadline or that he used a false date to get us to sign without giving us the opportunity to really review the documents. Who knows?
All I know is, the whole thing seemed highly unusual to me.
OUR FIFTH CYCLE WOULD end up being a season of growing pains. Looking back, I see that it makes sense that this was our last season as a
trio. From an outsider’s perspective, however, everything looked like it
couldn’t be going any better. The series had become such a phenomenon, there was even a movie being made about it. Well, sort of. The
House Bunny, starring Anna Faris, was a comedy set at the Playboy
Mansion, centering on a fictional Playmate who finds herself kicked
out of the mansion (upon turning 27) and takes refuge in a sorority
house. In the film, Anna plays a mansion resident named Shelley, a
character clearly based on Bridget.
“You should have been the sporty one,” Kendra teasingly pouted
at Anna the first time we met her as she prepared to shoot a scene in
the mansion’s backyard. Anna was done up with curly blond hair, a
frilly pink outfit, and her character had a grumpy pet cat, similar to
Bridget’s cat, Gizmo. Bridget’s pink-striped bedroom was used as Shelley’s room in the movie. Even the high-pitched voice and sunny,



Pollyanna attitude Anna affected for her character were very much
Bridget’s style.
We had cameos in the film, playing ourselves for a few scenes.
The movie would hit the number two spot at the box office on its opening weekend. Even I couldn’t believe what a phenomenon this frilly,
frothy, girly (and in many ways make-believe) version of the Playboy
world had become.
Not everything in our world was cotton candy and fluffy bunny
tails, however. That year, Kendra started taking Accutane for an acne
problem she had grown increasingly self-conscious of. To me, Kendra
was a beautiful girl, with acne or without, so on one hand I couldn’t
understand her paranoia, but on the other hand I could. Every girl
who ever lived at the mansion knew that her entire value, in Hef’s
eyes, depended on the way she looked. In fact, in an interview from
the previous year for an Elle magazine article, Kendra confessed: “I’m
very insecure right now about my face. I get scared with Hef looking at
me at the mansion and maybe thinking I’m ugly.” I certainly understood how she felt. In that same article, Hef went out of his way to tell
the writer that I had only “become beautiful” and that I “didn’t look
the same” as when he first met me, going on to attribute my new acceptability to my nose job.
Gee, thanks, Hef!
Whether it was an excuse not to have to adhere to the filming
schedules she hated keeping or if she really had grown debilitatingly
insecure, Kendra often refused to come out of her room to film scenes.
I would find out later that this was around the time she started
secretly seeing her future husband, Hank Baskett, so maybe that
factored into the equation as well. The producers were desperate to
find someone to take Kendra’s spot, should she decide to stop coming
out completely.



No one was talking about adding a new girlfriend or anything, but
I was asked to recruit some girls that I thought would be good for the
show to stay at the Bunny House for a month or so while we filmed. I
chose Laura Croft, a wild and crazy Playmate from Florida; Kayla
Collins, the bouncy blonde from the “Go West Young Girl” episode;
and Angel Porrino (also from the “Go West” episode), the funny girl
with the high-pitched voice from Las Vegas.
Having the girls around proved helpful as Kendra refused to participate in quite a few of the episodes (sometimes she would salvage
her spot at the last minute by agreeing to film something by herself;
other times she was just missing in action).
When Bridget produced a campy B movie called The Telling,
Kendra didn’t take part, even though she was offered a role in the film.
While Bridget and I traveled with Laura, Kayla, and Angel to Chicago,
Dallas, and New York to scout Playmates, Kendra chose to stay home.
One evening Hef popped around the corner into my vanity area
and announced that he was kicking Kayla out of the Bunny House.
“Why?” I asked. I couldn’t imagine what Kayla had done to warrant such dislike and was eager to stick up for my new friend.
“Kendra doesn’t like her,” he said firmly. “She thinks Kayla is
starting trouble between her and some of the other Playmates. She
feels like she is trying to take her place on the show. She’s toxic. She
has to go!”
“Are you sure?” I asked. “I don’t get it, maybe I should ask Kendra
about it. Kayla likes Kendra, as far as I know. Who is she supposedly
starting problems with?” I asked.
“Other Playmates,” Hef reiterated, as if that made him any more
clear than before. He went on to say how hysterical Kendra was about
it.



I couldn’t figure out what this was really about and pleaded for
Hef to let Kayla stick around for the remaining weeks that she was
scheduled to stay.
“I’ll talk to Kendra about it and make sure everything is okay,” I
promised, trying to play the peacekeeper.
Hef agreed to let her stay, but threatened to have her leave if she
made another misstep. He waved a finger at me and walked out of the
room.
I wasn’t too worried about the situation; I assumed Kendra felt
threatened by another petite, energetic platinum blonde running
around in front of the cameras.
She’ll get over it when Kayla leaves, I thought.
Later, I would hear through the grapevine that Kendra’s future
husband, Hank, was apparently after Kayla before he met Kendra. I
have no idea if this is true or not, but it would explain the freak-out.
For the second half of season five, the girls in the Bunny House
left and the three amigos gravitated back together. We invited all of
our moms (and our house mother, Mary O’Connor) out for a group spa
day, visited Barbi Benton’s outrageous home in Aspen, and went on a
road trip for Bridget’s sister Anastasia’s birthday. The three of us attended our friend Stacy Burke’s wedding in Vegas. Stacy was always
identified as “Hef’s former girlfriend” when her name popped up on
screen during an episode. As if there wasn’t any other way to identify
her! Hef truly loved to believe that the highlight of any of his ex’s lives
was the time they spent with him. He also loved to remind viewers of
all the beautiful women he “dated.”
Towards the end of the season, in the summer of 2008, we shot
our fourth Playboy cover, slated for February 2009 (this one would
end up being our last). After much lobbying, Hef agreed to a threesplit run, which meant we each had our own cover. It felt like a



gigantic milestone! Fans loved watching our shoots on the series
(which is most likely why we ended up getting four covers) and since
three separate shoots would mean more footage for the show, production kindly coughed up the budget: $10,000 per shoot. I was so grateful that production was doing this for us—I definitely felt like they
went more out of the way for us, and enjoyed our triumphs more than
Hef did. While Hef scoffed at the initial idea (to him, we still couldn’t
stand on our own), even he couldn’t refuse a free $30,000.
Hef approved my idea for the cover: I posed each of us in front of
the mansion in such a way that if you line up the covers it created one
panoramic shot. Another first for the magazine! I loved being a part of
these little “firsts.”
To make our three pictorials look as varied as possible, I talked to
the girls about each of us using a different photographer. Bridget
worked with Arny on an elaborate circus design, I suggested Kendra
pair with Stephen to shoot her for a Sports Illustrated–inspired beach
shoot, and I decided on up-and-coming photographer W. B. Fontenot
for a glamorous (yet dark) old Hollywood shoot at the historic Los
Angeles Theater. Unfortunately, I discovered at the last minute that
the decadent old theater’s fee to allow production to film there was out
of our budget. Only the still shoot was affordable. Since I wanted my
third of the pictorial to be done my way, I decided to cover the cost of
the photo shoot out of my own pocket and provide a different scenario
for GND to film. Additionally, this would give me rights to the photos
and the ability to grant Playboy the license to print only the photos I
approved.
In order to provide content for the TV show, I decided to do
something a little experimental and “out of the box” for a Playboy
shoot. Since the magazine would be using my theater photos, what I
shot for the show could be done with television in mind and not the



magazine. Back then, there wasn’t much room to move when it came
to Playboy photo shoots. Hef had very particular tastes, so if you
didn’t want to waste everyone’s time and money, you didn’t stray far
from the formula.
One of the recent activities we had filmed for GND was scuba
diving. I fell in love with it! We had filmed our training in the mansion
pool—I was astounded by how beautiful all the natural rock looked underwater. Inspired by that day, Barry and I did my shoot in the mansion pool, setting up several surreal underwater scenes: a tea party, a
chained escape artist, a mermaid, etc. It felt amazing to do something
so different! The underwater photos were used as “bonus” photos in
the Playboy Cyber Club, as most Playboy pictorials set aside a few bonus extras from each published pictorial for their membership site.
Hef, never missing a chance to paint me as ugly, would later publicly
announce that my underwater photos were never published because
they “weren’t flattering,” when in fact they were never meant for the
magazine in the first place.
THE RECENT DOMESTIC BLISS at the mansion was too good to last. While
the television show had bolstered Hef’s mood for quite some time, he
was eventually brought back down to earth by the sad financial state of
Playboy Enterprises. It’s no secret that the company hadn’t been profitable in years. I remember seeing a TV news magazine story on the
subject even before I moved into the mansion, but what I didn’t know
was that things had gone from bad to worse. It was 2008 and the economy was teetering. Coincidentally or not, Hef was turning into a
monster around this time. Bridget, Kendra, and I had each other’s
backs; it was next to impossible to create conflict between us. Without
the drama and infighting he so craved, lashing out at me became his



new way of letting off steam. Because I was the “main” girlfriend (and
meekest one in the bunch), Hef always felt safest picking on me. Sure,
he lashed out at the other girls from time to time, but he was more
cautious about it with them. He recognized that any of the other girlfriends would be way more likely to pack up and leave if they’d had
enough, so I was usually the one he took his frustrations out on.
In years past, when Hef and I had problems, I always blamed the
other girlfriends for the drama. Without any Mean Girl scapegoats left,
I was slowly beginning to realize that Hef being mean was just . . . Hef
being mean.
“Count it cumulatively!” Hef yelled so loudly that someone clear
across the street could have heard him. As Hef’s two sons Marston and
Cooper got older, “Game Night” with the girlfriends eventually replaced Tuesday’s “Family Night.” These Game Nights became a mindnumbing ritual—at best.
Bridget, Kendra, and I would gather around the dining room table
with Hef (and whatever girls were visiting the mansion that week) and
play games. I loved Monopoly and Clue, but he quickly lost interest in
those games. Hef was introduced to a very simple domino game called
Mexican Train and became instantly addicted. Ever the creature of
habit, Hef had us up playing Mexican Train every Tuesday, for hours
at a time. I loved it the first few times we played, but the game was so
mind-numbingly easy, I quickly became bored.
One night Hef was particularly uptight and kept anxiously checking the score pad over my shoulder. When he realized that I was keeping track of the scores per game (as I usually did) instead of cumulatively (we played many rounds of the game in a row), he blew a gasket.
“Do you even know what ‘cumulative’ means?!?!” he screamed in
my face so ferociously that it made my blood boil. I wanted to give him
my cumulative SAT scores and stomp out of the room, but I restrained



myself. Clearly he was looking for a fight and I wouldn’t give him the
satisfaction.
I took a deep breath and looked him square in the eye.
“Yes,” I said, firmly and evenly.
Everyone else was silent. Kendra and Bridget had been on the receiving end of such temper tantrums and unnecessary cruelty themselves, so I knew they were cringing for me as they looked down at
their dominoes.
It wasn’t just the verbal disrespect that was wearing on my nerves.
The limitations of mansion life were starting to get old. After seven
years living under Hef’s strict rules, I thought I could have earned
enough respect to be allowed to bend the rules every now and then.
Even prisoners get points for good behavior!
But unless cameras were following me, I still wasn’t permitted to
spend a night away from the mansion. Looking back now, I get frustrated with myself for being so blind. I was complaining because my
boyfriend wouldn’t allow me to spend the night away from his home,
because he wouldn’t allow me to stay out without him past 9 P.M. As a
28-year-old woman I still had a curfew!
I had never even asked to spend an off-camera night away from
the mansion until a worthy occasion presented itself. Playmate Tiffany
Fallon invited us to her wedding in Mexico to Rascal Flatts guitarist
Joe Don Rooney. A charming Southern girl, Tiffany was one of the
most beautiful women ever to grace the pages of Playboy and truly a
joy to be around. Bridget and I were ecstatic when we received the invitation, which included gorgeous luggage tags with our name and addresses printed on them.
“I’ve never been to Cabo before,” I exclaimed to Bridget, glowing
with anticipation.



Bridget and I looked into flights from Los Angeles into Cabo San
Lucas, Mexico, to see if we could fly in and out the same day. Despite
being only a two-and-a-half-hour flight, none were direct, and international travel is always a bit more time consuming. A day-trip just
didn’t seem feasible (or like any fun). Since Hef thought the world of
Tiffany, I figured we might actually have a shot at attending. But it all
depended on what kind of mood I caught him in. After talking it over
ad nauseam with Mary, I got up the courage to ask Hef if Bridget and I
could have a night away (Kendra was invited as well, but since she
didn’t want to pay for her own travel, she opted out).
“He says we can go!” I exclaimed excitedly into the ancient,
crusty, cream-colored phone in my dressing room. I heard Bridget
squeal on the other end of the line. Much to my surprise, Hef had given me a favorable response and told me to work out the details and let
him know how long we’d be gone. I felt like Cinderella finally getting
to go the ball! I couldn’t believe our good luck! I was so excited to have
my first girls’ night out in over six years!
“We’ll have to make travel plans right away: flights, hotels, transportation,” I rattled into the receiver. “If we leave in the morning, we’ll
get there with plenty of time to get ready for the wedding and the
party.”
“Party?” Like a record player screeching to a halt, I heard my
plans instantly evaporate. Hef repeated himself, “You’re going to a
party?”
It was as if he appeared out of nowhere, having changed into his
blue flannel pajamas, clearly oblivious to the fact that it was still daylight outside.
“Well, yeah,” I began fumbling. “I meant the wedding reception.
It’s like I told you, we can’t get a flight back late enough to be able to



attend the ceremony and reception. We’d be spending more time traveling to Mexico than actually in Mexico.”
I prayed he would see this logic, but Hef let out a stifled, sarcastic
chuckle, as if to mock me. He wasn’t even actually listening to me.
“You’re not going to any parties,” he said firmly before shuffling
his feet across the hardwood back into the bedroom. “The trip to Mexico is off.”
Without uttering a word to Bridget (who I was certain overheard
the whole ordeal), I gently put down the receiver as tears welled up in
my eyes. I realized in that moment that nothing was ever going to
change. My years of dedication earned me nothing. All I had to show
for it was an increasingly bitter boyfriend and no hope for a future.
“I’m so depressed, I don’t know what to do. I’m not happy here
anymore,” I told Bridget as we commiserated over not being allowed
to attend our friend’s wedding.
Truth be told, I had never been happy at the mansion, but I had
always been able to put on a facade leading others to believe that I
was. After all, Hef couldn’t be seen having unhappy girlfriends, could
he? I had been fooling someone else all these years as well: myself.
While I had come into the mansion looking for a temporary safe harbor and a possible stepping-stone to a Hollywood career, I had fallen
down a rabbit hole of nasty girls, a degrading love life, eroded self-esteem, and total fear of judgment from the outside world. I felt like a
failure on my mission to make something out of myself. I had tried to
rationalize my choices by convincing myself that I had fallen in love
with Hef and just wanted to settle down and have a family.
I know how absolutely insane it sounds to want to have kids with
someone in their 70s. You are basically robbing a child of his or her
father before it is even born. Now that I am a mom myself, the idea
seems even more unpalatable. But I suppose I thought of it as a ticket



out—in more ways than one. The last time the mansion had been
multiple-girlfriend free was when Hef was married and had two children, so (considering the mind-set I was in) that seemed like an ideal
scenario for me. I had convinced myself that the multiple girlfriends
were the problem, because I just couldn’t admit to myself that I had
made a terrible choice moving into the mansion in the first place. It
was cognitive dissonance at its finest.
There was also the part of me that was grateful for the things Hef
had afforded me: food and shelter when I needed it, the allowance put
towards paying off the debts I had from college, and the opportunities
to be on a television show. Though there was plenty to complain about
in the way I was treated, I was grateful for the good things and
couldn’t stand to be just like so many of the girls who had come before
me, taking and running with no shame. Attempting the marriage and
kids game, knowing deep down that it was a dead end, was perhaps
my subconscious attempt to end the relationship in the “nicest” way I
could think of.
I then confessed something to Bridget that had up to that point
been top-secret, known only to me, Hef, Mary, and a few doctors. A
step towards settling down had been made.
Hef had submitted semen samples to a fertility doctor only to find
what the doctor had predicted all along—that nothing from this
70-something-year-old man was viable. I’m sure Hef knew this, too,
and that was the only reason he decided to humor me and submit anything. I had made it clear to him several times that I wasn’t going to be
happy settling down at the mansion without a family and this was his
way of trying to “save the relationship,” though I’m sure he was quite
relieved to dodge having another child. This was concrete proof slapping me in the face that there was no future for me at the mansion and
it was either sit there and rot or take the plunge and face the world. I



couldn’t even admit wanting to leave to Bridget—I just told her how
heartbroken I was over the outcome of the tests and that I didn’t know
what to do with my life.
Bridget was a little surprised but not as shocked to hear the secret
scoop as one might think. She knew I was miserable and that I had
been for a while. She knew I wanted a family in my life someday and
that that wasn’t compatible with life at the mansion. She also knew of
my other fear: after being one of Hef’s seven concubines, would anyone even want me now? Had I ruined myself forever by making this
choice?
She was a consoling friend and a great listener, but she didn’t
really know what to say. She had her own set of frustrations with mansion life and didn’t have the answers.
There was something else happening that was distancing me from
Hef, and maybe he felt it—I was starting to realize that perhaps spending the rest of my (or, perhaps more accurately, the rest of Hef’s) life at
the mansion was not what I truly desired. It had been years since Hef
had chased after any other girls. It was becoming increasingly clear
that Bridget and Kendra were restless and thinking about leaving and
that Hef was fine with that, too. When I wasn’t burying my head in my
work, I was starting to panic inside. Was this really what I wanted? As
becoming Hef’s one and only came closer and closer to becoming a
reality, the truth was clear to me. I didn’t want someone who wanted
to settle down with me because he was getting too old and tired to continue his playboy lifestyle. I didn’t want someone who wanted to settle
down with me because I was convenient and docile, the “perfect” girlfriend. I had always wanted to find a soul mate who was creative, ambitious, adventurous . . . and yes, Hef might have been the epitome of
all three of those things at some point in his life, but that point was
long gone, probably before I was even born. What was left was an old



man running like crazy on the treadmill that was “life at the mansion,”
desperate to live up to his image.
I felt horribly conflicted. I couldn’t quite admit it to myself yet,
but I needed to find a way out.
In the spring of 2008, Playboy searched for the 55th Anniversary
Playmate to be featured in the January 2009 issue. Back in its heyday,
when Playboy was still in the home of every red-blooded American
male, the magazine would host a highly publicized nationwide
search—à la the “Millennium Playmate”—to find the perfect girl for the
anniversary issue, inspired by movie producer David O. Selznick’s
search for the actress to play Scarlett O’Hara in Gone With the Wind.
When Ukrainian model Dasha Astafieva happened across Mary’s desk
in the pages of the Eastern European country’s edition of Playboy, I
knew she was perfect! The black-haired beauty with ice blue eyes was
the clear front-runner, but GND producers and I wanted to create a
two-episode America’s Next Top Model–esque storyline following five
candidates as they competed for the title. In addition to Dasha, I chose
four girls Hef would consider for the coveted spot: Hope Dworaczyk (a
brunette standout from the Dallas casting call), Jessica Burciaga (a
petite Jennifer Lopez look-alike whom I found on Myspace), Crystal
McCahill (a curvy Chicago girl whose mother had been a Playmate in
the ’60s—a connection Hef loved!), and Karissa and Kristina Shannon
(blond twins that I thought would make perfect TV drama).
After spotting the Shannon twins’ photos in a stack of Playmate
test shots, I decided to research them a bit further. It still amazes me
what some people are willing to put up online. Both Karissa and
Kristina’s Myspace pages were riddled with the funniest posts imaginable. It’s hard to explain without a visual aid, but just imagine two
18-year-old girls posting the most over-the-top, wild, impressively illiterate entries. It was like something off The Maury Povich Show or



Jerry Springer. I couldn’t tell if they were serious or not, but either
way, they seemed like they might be the right kind of people to stir the
pot.
“If they are anything like their posts,” I said, laughing with Angel,
who was standing over my shoulder as we were looking at their profile
page, “they’ll make for great TV.”
The candidates were brought to Los Angeles that summer for
their test shoots and invited to stay at the Bunny House. Our Girls
Next Door production schedule was tight, so we had a quick turnaround and needed the girls nearby and available at a moment’s
notice.
The shoots were going along right on schedule, until I received
word from Dasha that Jessica had left the Bunny House the night before her scheduled centerfold shoot at the studio.
If she were MIA, we’d lose an entire day of shooting and waste
thousands of dollars. No one had any idea where my runaway Playmate had gone.
“We really need you to finish your pictorial,” I reasoned with Jessica when I finally got her on the phone. “We’re on a tight schedule
and every day costs money.”
It turned out that the runaway bunny went hopping back to
Orange County. According to some of the crew and other girls staying
at the house, Jessica had been tormented for days by the twins, along
with Playboy’s resident wild child Laura Croft. While Karissa and
Kristina were surprisingly professional on set, they were apparently
quite a handful after hours. Supposedly the three girls tormented Jessica: calling her names, smearing shaving cream on her bedroom door,
and relentlessly accusing her of sleeping with a GND crew member.
While these antics would have made for great TV, they were an example of the “negativity” Hef never wanted included in the final cut, so



my efforts to include some spice in the mix, by inviting the Shannon
twins, were wasted.
“If you come back, you can stay in the mansion guesthouse away
from the other girls,” I told her, hoping this would quiet her frayed
nerves. They’d done quite a number on the poor girl! After some coaxing, I finally got Jessica to agree. I asked Hazel, the office administrator, to put Jessica on the guest schedule in one of the four rooms in the
mansion’s guesthouse. After sorting out that potential disaster, I gave
myself a well-deserved pat on the back.
Crisis averted, I thought.
When I arrived later that day to the Sunday night buffet, Hef was
waiting for me in the dining room with a rabid look in his eyes.
“What are you doing putting Jessica in the guesthouse?” he demanded, his voice quaking with anger.
“She was having trouble with the other girls, so she left,” I calmly
explained to him, hoping he would recognize the volume of my voice
and aim to match it. The dining room was filled with guests and I
didn’t want to get lambasted in front of an audience. “I needed her
here for work first thing tomorrow, so I put her in the guesthouse. I
guess the twins were picking on her, so I thought this was an easy fix.”
“That is not your decision,” Hef bellowed at me, with no intent to
try to keep this argument private. “Daddy’s in charge of who stays
where! Not you!”
“But it’s such a minor thing I didn’t even think you would want to
be bothered with it,” I said truthfully. I’d invited girls to stay with us
before and he never had a problem with it. I was completely caught off
guard and could feel the tears start to burn my eyes. I took a deep
breath and held them back with every ounce of dignity I had left. Trying desperately to keep my voice from shaking, I continued, “You have
more important things to worry about.”



“Well, this isn’t your decision,” he spat at me. By now everyone
was staring at us. “Daddy makes the rules.” When I didn’t respond, he
turned to one of the guests and began jovial conversation as if nothing
had happened.
I looked down at my lap. I couldn’t bear to make eye contact with
anyone—I felt so humiliated. Despite his gentlemanly act, Hef had
never been a progressive thinker when it came to women. I had always
told myself that maybe I could change his attitude if he truly got to
know me. It didn’t look like that was ever going to happen.
As we were getting ready for bed, Hef shuffled into my dressing
area to inform me that our GND shooting schedule for the next day
had been postponed.
Shit, I thought. After hustling to get Jessica back up here and getting the fear of God instilled in me for it, everything was being
rescheduled.
“Why?” I asked.
“Something’s come up with Kendra that they want to shoot instead,” Hef managed, barely making eye contact with me. At that
point, we all knew Kendra had one foot out the mansion gate and was
in talks with E! for her own spin-off series. The producers were starting to put scenes into place that would set up her eventual exit.
Recently, Kendra and I had been getting along really well, but as I
had a full-time real job with actual responsibilities, I wasn’t really
thrilled about having to rearrange my work schedule for one of her
last-minute whims.
“We always have to move stuff for Kendra,” I said, half joking, half
hoping he would change the schedule back, while applying face lotion
in the vanity mirror and mentally preparing to reorganize my entire
workweek.
Hef stopped in his tracks and looked right at me.



“Stop being such a fucking CUNT!” he screamed, his face bloated
and red with his hands clenched into fists.
My mouth fell open in disbelief. In seven years, I never once
heard that word cross his lips. And now he wasn’t just saying it, he was
calling me it . . . his girlfriend, the supposed “love of his life.” I sat
there staring at him in total shock—unable to move a muscle or even
cry.
After what felt like 30 long seconds of him glaring at me with his
jaw clenched so hard, I thought he might crack his teeth, he stomped
his foot like a child and scuffled back into the bedroom.
Over the years, I’d dealt with a lot: the Mean Girls, the crazy rules,
the irrational outbursts, and the repugnant bedroom routine. Because
Hef so convincingly wore his “Gentleman Hef” act at all other times, I
was able to make excuses for him. But this was it; after being screamed
at for no good reason twice in one day, I was freaked the hell out.
There was no way I could fool myself into thinking Hef was a nice guy
anymore.
In that moment, I didn’t care if I couldn’t find someone to love me
outside of the mansion, because it was crystal clear no one on the inside loved me, either.
I needed to find someone to talk to, someone who could understand all the pressures I was under but wasn’t trapped in the same
bubble as I was. Maybe I could get some advice and a fresh perspective. I eventually decided on one of Hef’s friends, since he knew Hef
well and certainly understood the degree to which I was bound to the
show.
“I can’t take it anymore,” I confided to him two days later. I sat
down with my chosen confidant to discuss what had been going on in
my private life. I was already in the midst of filming season five, but I
felt like I couldn’t keep up the charade another minute.



Bridget had come in earlier and placed a box of Sprinkles cupcakes on the table. I cut myself a piece of one and passed the rest
across the table.
“Just hang in there,” he said, unwrapping the rest of the cupcake.
“He cares about you. He didn’t mean it.”
He paused for another moment, sensing this wasn’t giving me any
comfort. Twisting up his face into a thoughtful expression, he said, “I’ll
try to find out what’s bothering him.”
“It doesn’t matter if something’s wrong,” I said, trying to make
sense of everything in my head. “This is just who he is and I am realizing it for the first time.” I sighed helplessly and put my head in my
hands. My rope was rapidly fraying.
He then went on to remind me that Bridget and Kendra were
leaving soon and that Girls Next Door would then be all about Hef,
me, my work, and the girls that came through the studio. He honestly
thought this would lift my spirits. I loved working on the show, but
this wasn’t about the show . . . this was my life!
“Thanks for listening,” I said dismally.
I believed what he had said about the show. Not only was Kendra
on her way out of the mansion, but Bridget had recently been offered
her dream job hosting a show for the Travel Channel, so her departure
was inevitable as well. Audiences and E! loved the episodes that focused on my work at the studio—and so did I! It seemed like all my
dreams were coming true . . . but I had to ask myself: were those still
my dreams?
I was finally seeing Hef’s true colors—and accepting that perhaps
he had been that way all along. Now the promise of having Hef, the
mansion, and the show all to myself just sounded frightening.
I didn’t know what to do next. Despite the way he treated his girlfriends, I felt guilty even thinking about leaving Hef. I was constantly



being reminded of how blessed I was and how grateful I should be. I
didn’t want to disappoint or let anyone down. What would his friends
think? They’d always been so supportive of me because they saw that I
treated Hef well. Would I lose my job? I loved my job and couldn’t
bear the thought of losing it. Maybe I could find some way to stay on
as an employee?
As all these questions were playing over and over in my head like
a broken record, the time finally came to shoot the “good-bye” scene
between me, Kendra, and Bridget. The scene was shot in Bridget’s
room, which was filled with suitcases and rolling racks full of clothes
for the new travel show she was leaving to do. As I was the only part of
the trio who was supposed to be staying at the mansion, I just plopped
myself on Bridget’s bed and waited for the others to talk. Most people
who knew “Holly” from The Girls Next Door would have thought I’d
be ecstatic to see Hef’s two other girlfriends go, but in reality, I was on
the verge of tears. The feeling hit me like a ton of bricks. I don’t want
to be here without Bridget and Kendra. At that moment I knew it for a
fact, I just didn’t know how I was going to handle it.
After more than four years together at the mansion, our little
blond army was disbanding. We had each evolved so much in that
time. Like the freckle-faced producer had suggested years before,
Kendra really did grow up inside the mansion, but it seemed to be due
largely in part to a man she had met outside the mansion. For eight
months, Kendra had been secretly dating professional football player
Hank Baskett and was madly in love. Gone was the insecure little girl
who labeled Bridget and me the enemies and spent her days desperately jockeying for attention. In her place was a confident and gracious
young woman.
Bridget was off to host her own show. I couldn’t think of a more
perfect job for my best friend, who was packing up to travel the world!



When I first met her, all she had wanted was to be a Playmate, and she
ended up achieving so much more.
The scene couldn’t have been more genuinely emotional. I usually
kept my feelings locked up far, far away from the cameras, but this
time my tears flowed freely. It was in that moment that I realized how
much these two women meant to me and how only the three of us
could ever know what this wild ride we had been on was truly like.
It wasn’t just the prospect of losing my two costars that made me
feel so empty. I knew that even when I was the only girlfriend, there
would always be visiting Playmates and Bunny House residents to
keep me company. It was seeing these other two women evolve, in just
the ways they should be evolving, that made me realize that there was
so much more out there for me, too. I didn’t know what it was, but
something had to feel more genuine and fulfilling than simply being
the “first lady” Stepford Wife of the Playboy Mansion.
After our teary hugs good-bye, the cameras stopped rolling and I
slowly walked down the hall to the master bedroom’s back door. My
mind was reeling, my heart was hurting, and my stomach was tied in
knots. What was I going to do now? I knew I’d be heading to Vegas in
a few weeks to finish the last shoot for Jessica’s pictorial. Maybe having some time away from the mansion, without the cameras following
me, I’d actually have a chance to think . . . and Las Vegas seemed like a
good place to clear my head.

CHAPTER 11

“Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.”
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

T

hank you,” Hef screamed so loud that my cell phone shook, “for
giving me the WORST night of my life.”
Oh shit, I thought.
WE LANDED IN LAS Vegas early the previous morning for Jessica’s Playmate shoot. I thought the Playboy Club at the Palms could be a playful
backdrop consistent with the 55th Anniversary theme. Knowing that
the shoot would pull me out of Los Angeles for a day didn’t hurt,
either. Jessica’s shoot was scheduled over two days, and of course, per
the curfew, I had planned on flying back and forth each day. Obviously, this would have been exhaustingly impractical, and given the
state of mind I was in, I decided to just take a chance and try and stay
over. I really needed the time to myself.



“I really should stay overnight,” I told Hef. “It doesn’t make sense
for me to fly all the way home, get only a few hours of sleep, then turn
right back around and fly to Vegas the next morning.”
Given that my last attempt at spending an unchaperoned night
away from the mansion—for Tiffany Fallon’s wedding—hadn’t gone
over so well, I thought I was in for an uphill battle.
“Okay, darlin’,” Hef said casually—as casually as a normal boyfriend should respond to such an innocent request. “I’ll miss you.”
My shoulders melted away from my ears. Sweet relief.
“I’ll miss you too!” I replied.
A night alone! I thought, realizing I hadn’t had a night truly to
myself since I moved into the mansion seven years earlier. After a full
day on set, I was exhausted but still exhilarated at the idea of spending
some time by myself in Las Vegas without the watchful mansion eye
hovering over me. I was pleasantly surprised with how easy the conversation went—especially given the recent tensions between us—but
Hef had an extremely selective memory. I guess the verbal beating he
gave me was just another forgettable moment for him.
I desperately needed to get out that night and experience life as a
normal 20-something before deciding if I was going to go back to Hef
and settle down or break it off for good. I was like a bachelorette looking for her last hurrah or an Amish kid going out for Rumspringa. The
only problem was, I didn’t have anyone to hang out with. Jessica and
the photo staff were wiped out from the day’s shoot and all went to bed
early. But more importantly, to make this night really matter, I needed
to get away from Playboy people. The only friend I had in Las Vegas
was Angel, but she was newly pregnant, so she was hardly up for a wild
night on the town.
I guess I could text Criss, I thought. It was a dangerous option,
but a tempting one.



Las Vegas magician Criss Angel had been jumping onto my radar
for a while at that point. Bridget, Kendra, and I had been guest judges
on a reality competition series he had been featured on. We met briefly
backstage and he tossed some awkward pickup lines my way. Because
I was one of Hugh Hefner’s girlfriends, guys didn’t usually have the
gall to hit on me that blatantly, so I found his fumbled attempts
strangely endearing, like a teenage boy tripping over his own feet. I remember thinking he was attractive—his style was reminiscent of the
hair rockers from the ’80s that I thought were cute when I was a kid.
He kind of looked like a poor man’s Tommy Lee.
I didn’t really think twice about his flirting until after the taping
when Criss’s people contacted the Playboy publicity office to invite
Bridget, Kendra, and me out to a club in Los Angeles. He was a
notorious publicity-fueled womanizer (an A-list actress, a former child
star, a famous heiress, and a post-mental breakdown pop princess
were among his many conquests).
“No way!” I laughed into the phone line when Sally from publicity
called me. “Is he crazy? We’re Hef’s girlfriends!”
“I know,” Sally giggled. “I just had to let you know.”
I wasn’t entirely sure which one of us he was after, but I couldn’t
help but be flattered. He knew our position at the mansion and wanted
to take the chance anyway.
Not long after our initial meeting, we were invited to be guests on
yet another Criss Angel television series, Mindfreak. Unlike the talent
competition series, Mindfreak centered on Criss’s day-to-day life as a
street magician. Bridget and I accepted the offer and flew to Las Vegas
for the day with a representative from Playboy PR (aka a chaperone).
It was fun watching him on set. Unlike us, he had a say in what went
on in front of cameras, as well as a producer role, which I found fascinating. Despite his mysterious on-camera persona, behind the



scenes he was an easygoing jokester. In between setups, he invited us
to join him and his usual entourage at his resident suite at the Luxor
hotel (his friends referred to it as “the compound” behind his back).
I was charmed by the things that littered his suite: video games, a
foosball table, and an intricate model train set. I wasn’t so charmed by
the cheap plastic dry-erase board stuck to the back of his front door
with the words “Britney was here! Spears” sprawled across the center
in a drunken out-of-order scrawl.
We get it, I thought, laughing to myself. You banged Britney
Spears.
It was all sort of obnoxious, but truth? It made me like him even
more. I was so conditioned to the geriatric way of life at the mansion
that Criss’s boyish hobbies seemed so different and refreshing to me.
Though I had more in common with Hef, I was so oversaturated with
his life and style at that point that I probably would have found any
hobby besides dominoes attractive.
We shot our final scene at LAX nightclub inside the Luxor. Bridget and I were escorted to a large booth, already populated with pretty
girls. Producers sat me next to a petite sexy brunette with sparkly,
high-gloss lips.
“This is Monica,” Criss said as he introduced us. “She’s the main
boxing ring girl.”
“Nice to meet you guys,” she managed through a false smile. “I
just love Kendra! She’s the whole reason I like your show.”
Wow, subtle, I thought.
It seemed to me that Monica was Criss’s flavor of the night. With
puppy dog eyes, she had followed his every movement as he performed—and as she watched him, he was clearly watching me.
“To true love,” Criss toasted as he held up his shot glass filled with
a sugary Washington Apple shot, somehow managing to split his gaze



between Monica and me. It was a lame move to try to flirt with us both
at the same time, but it just made me laugh. After all, I thought he was
cute, but I wasn’t going to date him, so I didn’t waste my time feeling
insulted. I could tell that Monica definitely thought something was up,
though.
SINCE WE ALREADY HAD secured the Bachelorette Suite at the Palms—a
2,300-square-foot pink paradise (since rebranded as the “Hot Pink
Suite”)—for part of Jessica’s shoot, I decided I should crash there for
the night. Criss responded almost immediately to my text, saying he’d
love to grab dinner with me after his rehearsals. He suggested N9NE,
the steakhouse at the Palms.
Yeah, right, I thought. Criss and I were just friends, but the last
thing I needed was a picture popping up online of the two of us having
a “romantic” dinner together—or however the press might spin it. The
massive suite had a fully decked out dining room, so I suggested that
he come over and we order room service.
In between shoveling pieces of steak and plain baked potato in his
mouth, Criss rattled on about how he had to eat healthy because he
was practically naked in his new show.
Again, his thinly veiled attempts at baiting me couldn’t have been
more transparent, but I was slowly becoming more and more charmed
by him. I mean, I hadn’t flirted with a guy my own age since I was 21
(actually, Criss was 11 years older than me, but compared to Hef he felt
like a contemporary). After years of believing no guy would ever want
Hugh Hefner’s mistress, I was surprised that he actually seemed really
into me. After all, he dropped whatever plans he might have had on a
moment’s notice to hang out.



“Well, I gotta see that,” I joked, taking the obvious bait. Unlike the
ultra-feminine, docile fembot I was required to be as one of Hef’s girlfriends, with Criss I felt like I could be one of the guys. It was a refreshing change of pace.
Criss asked me what I wanted to do next, his thick Long Island accent coating every syllable as he examined his teeth in the reflection of
his steak knife.
“Take me out!” I demanded playfully. I had one night away from
the mansion and I didn’t want to squander it sitting up in the hotel
room, but we had to be careful. “I don’t know the city at all outside the
Palms. I just need to go somewhere low-key,” I explained. “Hef has
really strict rules when it comes to us, so I really can’t be seen with a
guy in public. It sucks, but . . .” I trailed off and shrugged my
shoulders.
Criss didn’t miss a beat.
He immediately suggested CatHouse, which he described as really
low-key, jumping at the opportunity to spend more time with me.
“Great,” I said, popping out of my chair. I had no idea what this
place was, but I was eager to get out of the hotel room. If it was lowkey, it worked for me. “Let me grab my purse.” I bounded into the bedroom to snatch my bag and check my makeup. Looking at myself in
the reflection, I couldn’t help but notice the big smile involuntarily
plastered on my face.
Maybe this is exactly what I needed, I thought, just one night out.
Maybe all of Hef’s restrictions are just making me crazy and I’ll feel
better about him tomorrow.
Of course, Hef would be irate if he knew I was headed out for a
night on the town with another man, but what he didn’t know
wouldn’t hurt him. Nothing was going to happen between Criss and
me. Plus, paparazzi didn’t really exist in Las Vegas—not like they did



in L.A., at any rate. With all the strict gaming laws in Nevada, photographers couldn’t be snapping away inside a casino. As long as we
were discreet, I’d be fine.
The nightclub was small, dark, and intimate. Situated inside the
Luxor, the boutique nightclub did feel surprisingly private, and I allowed myself to relax.
Criss asked if I would take a picture with the CatHouse girls, when
a posse of uniformed women arrived at our table.
No harm in taking a photo with a couple of dancers, I thought.
CatHouse was a restaurant as well as a nightclub, so I didn’t think the
photo could be that incriminating should it get out.
Criss and I sat in a corner booth, ordered two glasses of red wine,
and talked over the loud music for hours. We spoke about my relationship with Hef and how stifling it was. He confided in me that he started dating an 18-year-old girl who moved into his hotel suite and
“won’t move out,” as he put it. He told me he made a mistake getting
together with her and was planning on breaking it off in the nicest way
possible. The fact that he was dating someone 22 years younger than
him, not to mention barely legal, grossed me out since it reminded me
so much of the Hefner situation. However, Criss seemed so sincere
when he told me that he felt like he’d made a mistake and was looking
for someone different that I was willing to overlook the impression his
dating situation had made on me. We talked a lot about his new show
and the pressures he was under. After we ran out of things to say, he
started laying it on unbelievably thick.
“Ya know,” Criss began, going into a bumbling speech about how
he was looking for someone to have fun with . . . have fun with but to
have a serious relationship with, he was quick to add after he noticed
the look on my face.



I sat there quietly and let him continue as he stumbled all over his
words while trying to share his feelings with me. I took his nervousness as a compliment—he seemed to be smitten with me.
He continued on about how he had worked for fifteen years to
have his own live show and how it was finally becoming a reality.
Between his TV show Mindfreak (which was in its fourth season at the
time) and his over-the-top public performances (like being shackled
underwater for 24 hours in Times Square) Criss was, at that time, one
of the most well-known magicians in the world. He seemed so happy
about the direction his life was going, telling me that things had been
really crazy in the past, but now he could finally have a routine. He
was locked into a major contract for the next 10 years, and he asked
me if I knew how much he would be fined if he missed a single show. I
shook my head as the new direction of the conversation reflected his
more aggressive tone. He told me he would be fined $200,000. Criss
was constantly peacocking around in diamonds and Rolls-Royces,
bragging about his salary and never letting anyone forget how much
he was “worth.” To be honest, I found it a little tacky. But at the end of
the day I didn’t care. I have no idea if that number he threw out was
real or just his way of trying to impress me. At the time, I was just
flattered that anyone cared about impressing me, period!
He softened his voice again and went on to say that he had two
days off a week and that he needed someone who could plan fun
things for him to do on his days off, someone who he could do those
things with. It wasn’t the most romantic advance ever made, but I
couldn’t help but be intrigued. Here was this adventurous guy, so full
of life, who was looking for someone to be young and wild with.
He blurted out that he’d marry me right now when I didn’t take
the bait. I nearly spat out my drink. Was this guy serious? While he



was laying it on so thick, I found him playful and entertaining and he
was clearly dead set on making something happen between us.
“For publicity?” I said, calling him out on what I presumed was
bullshit.
To be fair, I knew that Criss was used to women shamelessly
throwing themselves at him, so I figured he didn’t quite appreciate
that I was simply interested in the novelty of hanging out with a guy
who was closer to my own age for a night.
“No,” he shot back, feigning shock at the suggestion. “What I
mean is . . .”
He began his spiel (one that I would come to know by heart): how
he was ready for a family and for marriage, how hard he worked for 15
years to obtain “success,” how he had been “almost a train wreck” (referring to his slutty behavior, which he loved to remind me of, as if it
were going to make me jealous or somehow grateful), and how he was
locked into the routine of his new show, BeLIEve.
While I spent much of the evening at CatHouse rolling my eyes, I
also had a hard time containing my smile. Sure, Criss was a wellknown player and he was coming on strong, but something about his
story made sense. Maybe he was at a point where he was ready for a
committed relationship. He was 40 years old and making some huge
changes in his life, so it was possible. On the other hand, we had only
just met, so the whole conversation seemed absurd, but it was fun for
me to get swept away in the idea that he was so into me. It was
something I needed to feel after years of Hef making me feel like a
piece of dirt. And who cared if he was serious or not? I wasn’t going to
get with the guy anyway.
The most important part of the night, for me, was that in the span
of one evening he had single-handedly crushed one of my biggest fears
about leaving the mansion. Perhaps I wasn’t damaged goods after all.



In fact, in Criss’s eyes, I was quite desirable. After a few glasses of
wine, Criss gave me a tour of the Luxor Theater and then accompanied
me back to the Palms and walked me back to my suite. He invited himself into my room, offering to “tuck me in.”
“Okay,” I giggled, knowing the cheesy line would get him through
the door, but it wouldn’t get him any further. After all, I wasn’t that
drunk.
I stumbled towards the large pink bed, jumped in fully clothed,
and pulled the comforter up to my chin. As he stood over the bed and
leaned in to kiss me, I erupted into a fit of laughter and turned my
head away from him.
“I can’t,” I playfully reminded him. “Remember?”
He sighed, standing back up. He reached down and removed my
earrings from each ear and set them by the bedside table.
He whispered sweet dreams softly into my ear. After walking
across the room, he scrawled something on the back page of a room
service menu (a note reading: “I miss you”), tearing out the sheet and
sticking it next to my curling iron on the bathroom counter.
“Sweet dreams,” I mumbled, immediately drifting off into a
peaceful sleep as he exited the suite.
When I woke the next morning to my buzzing cell phone, the last
thing I expected to hear was a ferociously angry Hef.
“Thank you,” Hef screamed so loud that my cell phone shook, “for
giving me the WORST night of my life.”
“What are you talking about?” I asked Hef defensively. Honestly, I
had endured so many verbal lashings lately that I had no idea what
could have possibly been the catalyst for this outburst. After getting
permission to stay over the night before, I had called him again shortly
before his 10 P.M. bedtime to wish him good night. We traded “I love
yous” and that was it. Sure, I hadn’t offered up my dinner and



clubbing plans for later that evening, because I knew he would never
allow it.
“I didn’t hear anything from you last night,” he continued,
screaming into the receiver. “I was up all night sick with worry!”
“But I called you right before you went to bed . . .” I tried rationalizing with him. “I don’t understand what you’re talking about. I had
my cell phone with me all night . . .” I kept rattling on, before realizing
he had to know something. “Why were you up?” I asked.
“Security told me,” he spat. “You had a guy in your room last
night!”
I paused for a moment, waiting for this information to sink in.
Holy shit, I thought. He actually had me followed.
“Nothing happened,” I said firmly and sternly. “I had a few drinks
and a friend walked me in to make sure I got into bed okay. That’s it.”
And it was. Sure, there was some definite flirting and perhaps
some blurred lines on his part, but I hadn’t done a damn thing. I had
never cheated on Hef. He had slept with an army of different women
during our time together, but I remained faithful. Despite all my insecurities and regardless of how desperate I was to have one night out, in
my mind I was still in a relationship. And I was nothing if not loyal.
Whoever was trailing me around Vegas apparently didn’t relay to Hef
just how quickly Criss exited my suite.
“Oh yeah?” Hef asked, mockingly, “Well, we’ll talk about it when
you get home. Thank you,” he repeated in dramatic Hef fashion, “for
giving me the worst night of my life.”
I pulled the phone away from my ear and waited for the line to
disconnect. I was equal parts stunned and seething.
How dare he have me followed, I thought. For seven ridiculous
years, I remained entirely faithful to this man. Even if my evening did
include some temptations, I had conducted myself like a good



girlfriend. I wouldn’t even kiss Criss when we were alone in a hotel
room in a moment I thought would forever remain private.
I knew Hef well enough to know that in his head, I was already
categorized as a “cheater.” I might as well slap a big scarlet A on my
chest, because he would never let me live this down . . . even though
there was nothing to actually live down. I was sure that for the rest of
our relationship he would call upon this incident every time he didn’t
get his way and use it as leverage. I could kiss good-bye any chance of
spending another night away from the mansion again.
One of Hef’s favorite stories to call upon during press interviews
is how, in his pre-Playboy days, his first wife, Mildred Williams,
cheated on him during their engagement. When his then-fiancée confessed to being unfaithful, he was devastated, but chose to marry her
anyway. Of course the marriage ended, but I always felt he used this
incident as a way to justify his philandering behavior and to gain sympathy from the public. It was as if he was saying, “Sure, I’m a womanizer, but my ex-wife made me that way. She did this to me.” In fact, he
seemed to have a penchant for cheaters. After all, he did crave drama.
His second wife was rumored to have been unfaithful (with a member
of the mansion staff), and his third wife ran out of their first planned
wedding to be with just one of the several men she had allegedly
cheated on Hef with.
It would never change, I thought. Hef would never change. If I
stay, this would be my life.
And in that moment I knew I couldn’t stay. I wouldn’t stay. I was
finally done.
RETURNING HOME FROM LAS Vegas felt as awkward as you could possibly imagine. I was determined to make my exit as quickly as



possible, but Hef kept putting off having too much of a serious conversation about it. He pleaded with me to stay, “despite hurting” him, but
I just gave him the cold shoulder. It seemed he felt that if he could
somehow stall and put off my leaving as long as possible that I would
just forget about wanting to leave and everything would go back to
normal (save for the giant imaginary albatross he had to hang over my
head). He could sense something inside me had shifted and was waiting for it to shift back. I wouldn’t allow him to manipulate me anymore. I had to make it clear to Hef that I was leaving.
Over the course of our relationship, I’d only ever initiated a “serious” conversation with Hef once, maybe twice. The morning after returning home from Las Vegas, I stopped by Mary’s office before heading out for the day to tell her I needed to talk to Hef as soon as possible. I felt that if I could get Hef on the phone, I could say what I
needed to say without him trying to throw me off course, pull at my
heartstrings, or lay on the guilt, as I was sure he would be successful at
doing if we tried to talk face-to-face.
“Hey, honey,” Mary said, a bit cautiously when she called a few
hours later. For months she’d seen the warning signs and knew what
was coming. “Hef’s on the line.”
Before I could say a word, I heard Hef speak weakly into the receiver: “Mary says you have something you’d like to talk to me about.”
“Yes,” I said, feeling instantly small and incredibly nervous. I took
a determined breath and continued, “I’ve decided I can’t stay any
longer. My feelings aren’t there anymore and I don’t want to fake it. I
need to make a life for myself and have a family.”
It felt like a full minute had passed before Hef spoke.
“Are you sure?” he finally asked, continuing to dangle the bait that
E! had ordered a sixth season of the show.



If I wouldn’t stay for him, he assumed that I would at least stay
for the show. It seemed as if he thought all a woman could possibly
want was fame and money.
I didn’t say anything. My mind was made up.
He pleaded with me to stay, to not tell anyone we broke up, to try
and work it out.
“I need my freedom,” I tried to explain. “I want to be able to actually hang out with my girlfriends and have fun like a normal person.”
“Ha!” he exclaimed, through a sarcastic cackle. “What makes you
think any of those girls will want to hang out with you if you aren’t my
girlfriend?”
After years of being conditioned to believe that I wasn’t anything
without Playboy attached to my name, I had actually started to believe
it. But I knew better now. His frantic attempts to keep me chained to
the mansion seemed transparent, desperate, and just made me angry.
“I’m sorry,” I said softly but firmly. I wouldn’t be manipulated.
Not this time.
And since I clearly wasn’t responding to his spiteful attempts to
cripple my self-confidence, he tried playing the guilt card, asking me if
I wanted him to have another stroke and saying that if he died it would
be my fault.
He wasn’t above using his age and health as a tactic to get his way.
Over the years, in a few of our more heated disagreements, he regularly made dramatic statements along these lines to get me to drop an
argument. It was ridiculous considering that our disagreements, up to
this point, had always been about things that should have been trivial
to him.
But for him it was all about winning. He didn’t care if I stayed out
of fear or out of pity, as long as I stayed, but I wasn’t going to budge.



I sat silently on the other end of the phone line, patiently waiting
for this episode to pass. After gaining some self-confidence and a bit of
perspective, I saw just how tired his routine had become. It’s like I was
seeing him with new eyes. He was no longer this infallible icon I created in my mind. He was just a spoiled child in an old man’s body.
“I have to go,” I said. “That’s final.”
Silence.
“Okay, darlin’,” he managed, his voice choking up (sincerely, for a
change). “But I hope you will reconsider.”
Hef was in denial about our breakup for a long time. He chalked it
up to some kind of phase I was going through. After giving him the
“worst night of his life,” he began pursuing me like never before. All of
a sudden, I mattered. The entire concept for season six of Girls Next
Door was to follow Hef and me as we trotted off into forever land . . .
just the two of us. To everyone on the outside it appeared as though
my wish was finally being granted: Mr. Playboy all to myself.
But it was too late. The switch had been flipped. It wasn’t one
thing in particular, but more a cocktail of the last few months: his
verbal lashings, my newfound confidence as a career woman, and the
affirmations of another man all allowed me to see that the fears I’d
been living under for seven years were just smoke and mirrors. Now
the thought of living with the unfounded “cheater” moniker was just
too much to take. I couldn’t stay any longer.
After a meeting in Mary’s office, Hef and I decided that I would
move down the hall into Bedroom 5 while I finished shooting my final
GND scenes. Most of season five was already in the can when I met up
with Criss that night in Vegas, but there was still more to do. It came
as a shock to most of the staff and show producers when I actually
began the process of moving out of the master suite. (None of my
packing was captured on the show. Hef and the producers were still



hoping I would change my mind about moving out and that I would be
back as Hef’s girlfriend by the time cameras started rolling for season
six.) I had done a good job of acting like a blissfully happy girlfriend—only the closest of confidants had known about my unhappiness. It was oddly nostalgic to be moving back into the same room I
moved into as a mansion newbie seven years prior. Back then, I barely
had a suitcase full of possessions; now I had substantially more to
pack. I had a large storage closet—full of clothing, mementos, and
Christmas decorations—in the mansion’s basement, not to mention
another one in the Bunny House across the street. Needless to say, this
move was going to take a bit more time.
As I packed up the vanity in the master bedroom, I labeled each
box with a Sharpie, listing the contents. One evening after work, I was
making trips from Hef’s bedroom to my old room down the hall. I noticed one box had been scribbled on in writing other than my own. In
his distinctive handwriting, it read: “Hef’s Heart.” In that instant, my
own heart sank. Despite everything he’d done to me, I didn’t enjoy
hurting him. But that wasn’t going to stop me. I knew Hef wasn’t in
love with me. He was in love with the idea of being in love. He was in
love with the routine and convenience of our relationship. I wasn’t interested in settling anymore, I was looking for my happily ever after.
During my final weeks in the mansion, Hef waffled between doting on me and punishing me. If I ever seemed to be in too good of spirits, he would do his best to smack me back down with snide comments
or attempts at making me jealous by toting around the Shannon twins.
I couldn’t have cared less. In fact, I wanted him to move on! It would
have taken some of the pressure off me. I was beginning to realize that
he preferred miserable and uninspired Holly—maybe because she was
easier to control. I buried myself in work. For the time being, I was allowed to keep my job at Studio West. While I had hoped it was



because of my contribution and the experience I had gained over the
last two years, I realized that Hef’s team most likely advised him to
keep me on staff to avoid any kind of lawsuit or wrongful termination
accusations.
Still, while Hef had begun the process of “moving on,” he hadn’t
lost hope that I would reconsider and move back into his master suite.
Any time I would run into Hef in the mansion hallway, it was painfully
awkward.
“I’ll have the rest of my stuff out of your room by tomorrow,” I
told him during once such encounter.
He assured me I could take my time and there was no hurry, but I
was anxious to get my stuff out ASAP.
The next day, while Hef was working in his office, I went into the
master suite for my last round of packing. When I went to grab my
things from a shelf near the bed, I noticed one of Hef’s file folders sitting neatly in the middle of what was formerly “my side of the bed.”
That’s weird, I thought.
Hef never leaves important documents lying around. They’re always locked up in his bedroom safe or his office, or being hand carried
by him personally. He was a man of routine—and this was entirely out
of character.
Curious, I picked up the stack of papers, which were obviously left
for me to see. Inside was a copy of his last will and testament. I spent
seven years living with the man, so I can tell you on good authority
that he would have never have left something this important lying
around by accident. It was clear to me that this was meant for me to
see.
It carefully outlined the division of his estate. After death tax, his
fortunes would be divvied up starting with roughly 50 percent to his
charitable foundation and the bulk of the remainder divided evenly



between his four children: Christie, David, Marston, and Cooper. No
surprise there.
What came next was shocking to me. For the better part of a decade, Hef used money as a means to control each girlfriend. Anything
he shared was temporary: a weekly allowance, monthly payments for
leased cars, etc. At a moment’s notice, he had the ability to pull the rug
out from under us.
But it was there, in black and white. The will stated that
$3,000,000 would be bestowed to Holly Madison at the time of his
death (provided I still lived at the mansion). At the time, it was more
money than I’d ever know what to do with.
We had never spoken about his will—and I never expected anything like that. In the past, he had casually mentioned leaving me the
Bunny House, but I never took the bait. Disgusted by the gold-digger
image the public had of me, I tried to stay away from those kinds of
clichés as much as possible in my real life. I still held on to a shred of
hope that I would one day be financially independent. I had saved
enough of my GND salary to put a down payment on a Santa Monica
condo I hoped to rent out. And once I had started making some
money, I stopped accepting the “clothing allowance” that made me feel
so cheap.
Eventually, I would go on to find my own success, but I didn’t
know it back then. My future was a gamble. Despite spending seven
years in one of the most expensive homes in Los Angeles, living a relatively lavish lifestyle, I had no wealth of my own—just the illusion of
it. Three million dollars was a lot of money to me.
But I didn’t want it. I actually pitied him for stooping to that level.
I couldn’t help being offended. Did he really think he could buy me?
I put the folder back on the bed just as I had found it and never
breathed a word of it.



During one of our final encounters at the mansion, Hef spotted
me as he shuffled down the hallway.
“You’re not wearing your bunny necklace,” he said, a sorrowful
look plaguing his eyes. I didn’t know what to say. I was only glad he
didn’t know that I had already started the process of removing my
bunny tattoo as well.
“No one,” he said, pausing for emphasis, “will ever love you as
much as I do.” He enunciated the sentence slowly, as if he were making a grand speech. I had no words. Instead, I gave him a friendly hug
in order to avoid actually speaking to him. I know he was trying to
sound romantic, as if he were pledging his undying love, but to me his
comment sounded like a slight. I knew I deserved better—and there’s
no way his kind of love was the best the world had to offer.
Through his vain attempts to intimidate, guilt, persuade, and
eventually bribe me, the only thing he succeeded in doing was to convince me that I was making the best decision I had made in a very long
time.
During those final few months, I began spending more time in Las
Vegas. It was a town brimming with opportunities! I met with the producers of the Crazy Horse Paris, a tasteful cabaret show at the MGM
Grand. We had discussed me doing a guest run before, but now I was
ready to pursue it. Bridget and I were hired to host a Halloween party
in Vegas and were brought out early to shoot flyers for the event. And
while my trips were primarily business focused, I was finally single
and free to date whomever I wanted, so I found myself seeing Criss in
my spare time.
Though I was cautious to take it slow at first, over time it was
clear he really was looking for something serious and our relationship
grew romantic.



When I announced to him that I was leaving Hef and the mansion, Criss opened up his world to me without even a moment’s hesitation. He pleaded with me to move in with him by Halloween during
one of my trips to Las Vegas.
“No!” I giggled. “That’s too soon!”
I didn’t want to rush into a relationship so fast. Honestly, I didn’t
see myself settling down with him quickly. I had big plans, none of
which involved living with a man. I hoped to split my time between
L.A. and Las Vegas in order to balance both my job at Studio West as
well as performing regularly at the MGM. I had hopes of developing
my own spin-off TV series chronicling my new life in Vegas as a single
showgirl.
Unfortunately, my need to feel loved would win out over my need
for independence.
DURING MY LAST FEW weeks at the mansion, Bridget was back on a
break from filming her travel show. After we discussed the upcoming
Halloween party, I had to fill her in on how awkward things continued
to be for me under Hef’s roof.
“Hef came into my room the other day and tried ‘reasoning’ with
me,” I told Bridget, sprawling myself out on her large round bed. “He
was trying to talk me out of dating Criss and was like, ‘The media calls
him a douche bag!’ I didn’t know what to say!”
Despite everything, Hef hadn’t quite given up yet. A few weeks
after that fateful night in Las Vegas, photos emerged revealing what
appeared to be an intimate evening I spent with Criss Angel in Las Vegas. I remained at the mansion for about two months total after Hef
and I officially broke up, in order to fulfill my obligations to the TV
series. During those eight weeks, as I waited around to see what sort of



final scenes I needed to film for season five, more details began to not
so mysteriously emerge in the press about my relationship with Criss
(for being an “illusionist,” he sure was obvious).
The media was having a field day with the idea that all three of
Hef’s girlfriends were simultaneously leaving the mansion for other
men. Though Bridget hadn’t gotten involved with anyone yet, the media jumped on any sighting of her with another guy, hoping to round
out the story of Kendra and Hank and me and Criss. One tabloid article in particular erroneously linked Bridget to a Las Vegas DJ. Since
that same article went out of its way to mention that I was whisked
away in Criss’s black Rolls-Royce Phantom, I couldn’t help but think
he was behind that article, too.
“Yeah, he talked to me about it, too,” Bridget said. “He thinks dating Criss will be bad for your career.”
Was I seriously going to get career advice from a man who spent
seven years treating me like a glorified pet?
“I told him a long time ago that I knew that you were really depressed,” Bridget continued, “and that’s why you didn’t go to that
Lakers game a while ago.”
Months before our breakup and my fateful trip to Las Vegas, Hef,
the girls, and I had plans to attend a Lakers game. Slowly, I attempted
to get ready, but couldn’t gather up the strength to finish my hair and
makeup. Like a zombie, I walked back to our bed and tucked myself in
for the night. Have you ever been so depressed that it’s a struggle just
to leave your room? By then I had weaned myself off the antidepressants I had been prescribed back when GND first started filming.
Between the success of the series and my new career, I had established
some much-needed self-confidence and even found some happiness in
my day-to-day routine. But in moments of weakness, the depression



kept creeping back in. It forced me to realize that it wasn’t just in my
head . . . it had to be this lifestyle that was draining me.
“I told him he should really talk to you about it,” Bridget offered.
“Well, he never did,” I said.
If I had any doubts about my decision to leave, what Bridget said
had just squashed them. Hef knew how desperate, sad, and broken I
was but didn’t do a damn thing about it. I’d given seven years of my
life to a man who couldn’t even have a conversation with me.
Kendra’s and my final scenes with Hef were a bit less authentic
than the good-bye scene the three of us girls had filmed a few weeks
earlier. Ever concerned with public perception, Hef had to ensure that
the “breakups” painted him in the most positive light possible. He
couldn’t seem heartless, but he couldn’t appear devastated by our departures, either. It was a delicate balance to strike—especially since it
was a total farce. When Kendra walks into Hef’s bedroom to reveal to
him that she’s decided to leave the mansion, viewers can clearly see
framed photos of Karissa and Kristina Shannon (who moved in as girlfriends in October 2008) scattered around the bed—having already replaced the photos of the three of us.
Hef didn’t start dating the Shannon twins until after Bridget,
Kendra, and I had all announced our departures, so the framed photos
posed a continuity flaw that the three of us girls noticed right away
when we viewed the episode. The producers either didn’t notice it or
didn’t care. In fact, it worked out for them quite nicely, because in order to make Hef look like the playboy he wanted to be portrayed as, it
was important that him dating the Shannon twins be worked into
GND’s fifth season before Bridget, Kendra, and I left. After all, how
could the great Hugh Hefner ever be single? Even for one day?
The twins are shown moving into the mansion in the same episode we learn to scuba dive (and before we shot our final pictorials). It



worked nicely for them because when Hef came to see us scuba dive in
the ocean he brought a gaggle of Playmates with him, including the
Shannon twins, who were shooting their Playmate pictorial. But the
twins were never predatory, never trying to steal anyone’s boyfriend.
They didn’t move in until after the three of us had all broken it off with
Hef, despite what he would like viewers to think.
When it was finally my turn to film a good-bye scene, producers
asked me to film a short segment with Hef where I was to tell him I’d
be heading to Las Vegas to work on a pictorial—it was intended to be
my last scene. It felt so forced and inauthentic. The producers always
knew how to leave a scene open-ended if need be—if I were to truly
leave Hef forever, as I said I was going to, they had an exit scene for
me. By asking me to refer to the “photo shoot in Vegas” I suppose they
intended that to be where I met Criss. If I changed my mind and came
back before the next season began filming (as they hoped I would) the
scene could be played off as a temporary departure. In a moment of
rebelliousness, I decided to wear a Criss Angel logo hoodie—a blatant
flaw in the continuity of the series. The show was setting it up as if I
were on my way to meet Criss for the first time, but in reality that
wasn’t the case. It was my way of alerting savvy viewers that it was all
for show. If I met Criss during that “photo shoot in Vegas,” why was I
already wearing his hoodie? I thought someday someone might notice
and realize that our relationship unraveled much differently than they
portrayed it on television. Since the crew didn’t notice the jacket, no
one asked me to remove it.
The mansion’s annual Halloween bash—the Saturday before the
actual holiday—was my final hurrah before heading off to the Santa
Monica condo I’d recently purchased (and eventually to Las Vegas and
Criss). After years of being seated next to Hef at these soirees like a
perfect little soldier, I was eager to finally let loose! As a nod to my



new Vegas obsession, I decided to go as Elvis and immediately buddied up with John Stamos (who was also dressed as Elvis) and his
then-girlfriend (as Priscilla, naturally)—and together we all braved the
mansion’s elaborate haunted house. The two were friendly and down
to earth, a nice contrast to the overall feel of this particular party.
As I looked around, I realized that the mansion wasn’t quite the
same magical place it had been when I first arrived. Like Dorothy, I
peeked behind the curtain and saw the frail old man pretending to be
someone he wasn’t. The mystique had vanished.
But it wasn’t just my perception that had changed. Just a few
months earlier, the ailing financial state of Playboy Enterprises
prompted them to begin selling tickets to the once-exclusive soirees.
The guest list ballooned to accommodate the increasing demand—and
the vibe became crowded and hectic. The new guest list was less exclusive in every way and a frantic touristy vibe took over the parties. It
was easy to get separated from your friends, because it was so crowded
and the overwhelming influx of newbies hungry to snap photos of
every guest and every detail of the party totally changed the entire feel.
By 2008, everyone had a smartphone and the “no camera” rule
that used to be what kept the parties a private and exclusive haven for
celebrities was obliterated. Since by that time I had found a bit of TV
fame, I spent much of the night taking photos with guests. The slow,
sexy elegance of the first Playboy party I had attended back in 2000
had completely vanished.
So much for “what happens in the grotto stays in the grotto,” I
thought.
I decided then and there that the Halloween party was the last
mansion party I ever needed to attend.
And it was.



Meanwhile, as I was contemplating how much things had
changed, somewhere across the property that very night, history was
repeating itself and someone else was seeing the mansion through new
eyes. While Kristina and Karissa Shannon spent the evening stuck at
Hef’s side, itching for more freedom, someone else was standing outside Hef’s roped-off area, looking in. I imagine the twins didn’t want
the responsibilities of being the “main” girlfriends, so they had their
eyes open for a girl to fill that spot. And it was there that they spotted
her, standing just a few feet away from their table, boiling over with
nerves at the thought of meeting Gatsby himself.
Just as I had been, seven years earlier, Crystal Harris was 22,
thin, blond, a bit plain, and somewhat shy. How could she ever outshine those gorgeous, vibrant Shannon twins? They had no idea that
night that she would be their eventual undoing.
While someone else was thrilled at the prospect of getting into the
inner circle of the Playboy world, I couldn’t have been happier to be
getting out. The Playboy Mansion certainly changed my life—for better
and for worse. It had been both my safe haven—and my prison. Living
inside those hulking walks hadn’t been the path to fame and fortune
that I had imagined—and it certainly hadn’t been my path to love. I
was grateful for all I had gained there, but still mourned all that was
lost.
As I drove out of those daunting gates, I never once looked back.

CHAPTER 12

“She’s my prisoner, you know!” the Red Knight said
at last.…
“I don’t know,” Alice said doubtfully. “I don’t want
to be anyone’s prisoner. I want to be a Queen.”
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

C

riss was desperate to have me in Las Vegas for the premiere of his
show BeLIEve on Halloween night. After fulfilling my final scheduled
obligation to Playboy (in New York with Bridget and Kendra to promote a recently developed Playboy perfume—just don’t call it Girls
Next Door!) I jetted off to Sin City to walk the “black carpet” with my
new boyfriend.
Seduced by this good-looking man who was seemingly frantic in
his affections for me, I allowed myself to be lured in. After knowing
each other only a few months, he needed me by his side for the world
premiere of his new show. I was the one who calmed his nerves, he
said. I had become so used to taking a backseat to Hef and sharing the
remaining spotlight with other women, I was beyond flattered that this
successful man was so enthralled with me—and only me.



BeLIEve had utterly bombed during press previews. Critics were
merciless in their dismembering of his performance. The Las Vegas
Sun ruthlessly called Criss “a charmless mook” and “a rudimentary
stage performer—he’s barely believable playing himself.” It didn’t stop
there. The writer went on to say, “The single most amazing thing about
‘Believe’ is that it is still so boring.” Ouch! No wonder he was nervous!
I felt sorry for the guy.
And, like a magician does when wanting to guide the audience’s
attention away from a trick, he needed to provide a distraction, or in
magician’s terms, “a misdirection,” for the media the night of the
show’s opening. That night, unbeknownst to me, I was the
misdirection.
On the night of his premiere, Criss introduced the world to his
splashy new romance: the flashy blonde he had seemingly stolen from
right under Hugh Hefner’s nose. We paraded down the press line hand
in hand, before pausing in front of photographers so Criss could plant
a big wet kiss on me.
Wow, I thought, giddy with the excitement of my new romance.
He really wants to show me off!
It wouldn’t take long before the illusion started to dissolve.
TRUE TO HIS WORD, Criss spent his days off toting me around Las Vegas. Like a normal young couple, we’d spend afternoons four-wheeling
out in the desert or going to pool parties and our evenings eating at the
finest restaurants and catching some of the Strip’s most acclaimed
shows. The two of us didn’t really have that much in common, but I
was so thrilled to be able to go out and try new things that I didn’t notice or care. We were quickly becoming the most buzzed about couple
in Las Vegas. I have to admit, it was nice to be recognized as someone



independent of Hef. Sure, people still thought of me as a “Playboy
Bunny,” but I had separated from Hef and was still not only relevant
but thriving (things he told me that I wouldn’t be without him). My
name was topping search engine lists regularly and I was being written
about in gossip blogs. I had never received that kind of attention when
I was with Hef! With all the excitement swirling around me, I found it
easy to go along for the ride.
Not long into our courtship, Criss bought me a piece of jewelry—a
small diamond cross necklace. Conveniently, a photo of us at the jewelry store popped up on a few gossip sites, most of which speculated
that we must be engagement ring shopping.
With a 10-year Vegas residency on the horizon, Criss was in the
market to purchase his first home—and insisted on me coming along
to all the showings. He wanted me to love what he insisted would be
our future home. As we’d stroll through these sprawling Vegas estates,
he’d ask my opinions on this feature or that fixture—seeming interested in what I had to say.
On the days I would travel back to Los Angeles to work on my
Playboy job that I had somehow managed to hang on to, I’d come
home to a huge bouquet of red roses already waiting for me at my
Santa Monica condo. Criss didn’t waste a single opportunity to continue impressing me. He would text me often throughout the day wanting
to know what I was up to, getting worked up when he couldn’t get
ahold of me.
After a few trips back to the coast, Criss began insisting that one
of his security guards accompany me. As our public profile continued
to rise, Criss said it was in order to keep me safe. The guard would stay
in a hotel near my condo and was to accompany me everywhere. It
was awkward and embarrassing to have to explain to my friends why a
security guard joined us for every meal.



“Doesn’t that seem a little unnecessary?” one friend suggested
over our lunch. “Maybe a bit possessive?”
“No,” I said, trying to hide my embarrassment. Criss worshipped
the ground I walked on and genuinely worried about me, I thought.
“He’s just protective,” I explained.
In my post-mansion life, Criss seemed to be exactly what I
needed. It wasn’t long before I reverted back into the Converse-wearing, jeans, ponytail, and black nail polish kind of girl that I used to be
in high school. No longer feeling the pressure to look and act like a human Barbie doll was a gigantic weight off my shoulders. In fact, Criss
even encouraged me to go without makeup.
Wow. Somebody who likes me for who I really am! I thought.
Despite having made a complete break from my relationship with
Hef, I still felt like I was awkwardly darting back and forth between
two worlds. Not only was there my job at the Playboy Studio, but there
were still Girls Next Door obligations to fill. I had been with Criss for
only about six weeks or so when I received a call from the GND producers asking me to come into the studio for audio commentary for the
season five DVD. Understandably, now that the season was wrapped
and edited, the producers were eager to get this commentary in the
can before the three of us girls scattered even farther in different
directions.
Despite placing an impenetrable candy coating on what was often
a miserable existence, I was always very grateful for Girls Next Door
and the opportunities it provided me. Who knows where I would have
ended up if it hadn’t been for the series? Perhaps still locked behind
that giant gate, depressed as ever . . . or worse.
Committed to fulfilling my obligations to the show, I agreed to
come in that week. For the audio commentary, producers set Bridget,
Kendra, and me in chairs around a monitor. They’d play each episode



and we’d talk about what was going on in that moment or provide
some behind-the-scenes details. Despite having been away from the
girls for only a few weeks, it felt like I hadn’t seen them in years—and
it was so much fun laughing over the show with them.
My jovial mood, however, wouldn’t last. During the final episode,
producers had cut a video montage of Hef’s and my most romanticseeming moments over the course of the last five seasons. With our
breakup (not to mention the way he had treated me) still so fresh in
my mind, I couldn’t begin to manufacture any sort of sentiment for the
commentary. In fact, the entire montage made me sick to my stomach.
“Really?” I groaned into the microphone at our producer. “Do you
have to do this?”
“Holly, Hef is a romantic,” he said calmly. “He wants to hear from
you.”
“It’s gross,” I protested. “Do you have to put all this in? We’re not
together anymore. Nobody wants to see this.”
He seemed disappointed that I wasn’t making this easier, but I
didn’t care. The montage seemed wildly inappropriate. Plus, Criss was
growing more and more sensitive about my affiliation with Playboy.
About a month into our living together, he started getting really upset
any time an article would surface linking me to anything Playboy-related. His rants frightened me, but since I had (foolishly) already
moved in with Criss, I gave him chance after chance, hoping that this
was a passing phase. In my head, I imagined Criss watching this episode and completely going off the deep end (which is exactly what
would happen).
After we wrapped commentary, Bridget, Kendra, and I gathered
around outside the studio with the producers and the crew chatting
about the season, what we loved, what we hated, etc.



“You know, Hef likes all the drama,” Kendra began. We’d all had
our complaints in the past, but this was the first time Kendra was so
vocal in front of production. I guess since it was all over, she had nothing to lose. “I remember one day we were all watching a movie and afterward Hef followed me back into my room. He goes, ‘You know, I’m
really disappointed that you didn’t sit closer to me.’ And it was so
weird, so I just said, ‘Well, that’s, like, where Holly sits and I don’t
want to, you know, step on anyone’s toes.’ Then the dude stomps his
feet and was like, ‘I like the drama!’ ”
Kendra’s story hit me like a punch in the gut. While I had long ago
tired of Hef’s double standards, ridiculous rules, and belittling comments, this was the first time I really realized what a manipulator he
was. Suddenly, it all became clear to me. The biggest reason I never
got along with most of the girls in the house was Hef. He encouraged
the infighting all along, despite his fake pleas for harmony. He was
looking more and more pathetic in my eyes. I couldn’t believe I had
been manipulated for so long.
I kept in touch with the show’s producers regularly. Since I openly
blabbed to the press about my hopes to do a reality show of my own in
Vegas, they called to find out what I had in mind. They also contacted
me regularly to invite me to Kendra’s bridal shower and to confirm me
as a bridesmaid for her wedding. It was difficult for me to communicate with them, though, because Criss seemed to be getting more and
more paranoid about any affiliation I had with Playboy or Girls Next
Door and tried to talk me out of even attending Kendra’s wedding.
While his behavior troubled me, I could almost sympathize with it, in
my own twisted way. After getting some space between me and the
mansion, I was truly beginning to realize just how poorly I had been
treated and what a grim situation that had been, and so in a way, I saw
Criss’s behavior as him protecting me from Playboy.



During one of Criss’s performances, I waited for him backstage
and found myself alone for the first time in weeks. Usually I watched
his shows from the audience or waited backstage with other members
of his entourage, but that evening everyone else must have been occupied because I was the only one in the room. I decided to take the rare
opportunity to call one of my favorite producers and catch up.
The call didn’t go quite how I had planned. Somewhere in the
midst of our catching up, what was meant to be a friendly phone call
turned into a berating session. I believe it stemmed from the fact that I
didn’t react the way they wanted to the “Holly and Hef love montage”
during the audio commentary session. What I remember clearly is
ending up in tears and trying to stick up for myself as he rattled off a
list of complaints Hef had logged against me in a recent bad-mouthing
session. I knew that when I made the choice to leave the mansion that
I was leaving my spot on TV behind, but I certainly hadn’t expected
Hef to try and poison everyone I had worked with against me. My producer friend told me that all of the things I’d said during the commentary made everyone uncomfortable: him, the crew, Bridget . . .
Apparently it had been okay for Kendra to rattle on and on about
Hank throughout the commentary, despite having dated him behind
Hef’s back for the better part of a year. I guess because they had been
planning a Kendra spin-off anyway, that was okay. True, they thought
the spin-off was going to be about a wild, single Kendra out on her
own, but the concept of the show was easily adaptable to the idea of
Kendra having a boyfriend, once they found out about the secret
months-long romance. I had thrown a huge wrench in their vision for
GND season six, however, so my behavior and honesty during the
commentary was deemed “wrong.” It was incredibly hypocritical, but
what else was there to expect from the same camp that thought we
should all be faithful to Hef without him showing us the same respect?



Seized by an anger that was bubbling up inside me, I phoned the
mansion to confront Hef about what he was saying about me behind
my back. For years, Hef had maintained friendships, however superficial, with most all of his ex-girlfriends. I had expected to receive the
same politically correct treatment and made sure that anything I said
about Hef in the press was favorable and kind. For some reason,
though, I seemed to be the first ex-girlfriend that he was going out of
his way to poison.
“Hello?” Hef answered, not sounding particularly happy to hear
from me.
“Hi,” I said and jumped in before he could stop me. “I’ve been told
about all the things you’ve been saying about me and it’s not right. I
did my best to be the best possible girlfriend for seven years and . . .”
“Ha!” he shouted into the receiver, going on to accuse me of having had an agenda all along and reprimand me for not showing up at
mansion events post-breakup.
“I wanted to give you your space!” I near screamed into the
phone. “I’m not going to show up and push whoever you’re seeing out
of the way. I was never that kind of girlfriend. I’m not Tina. I’m not going to play that game.”
I was fuming. For so long I tried to be—had been, in fact—a model
girlfriend, and here was Hef, characterizing me as if I were no better
than all the two-faced manipulators he dated before me. I was just trying to move on and live my life, but my 80-something ex wouldn’t stop
talking smack about me to anyone who would listen. So much for exiting with any grace!
He could only respond by ranting about how much I had supposedly changed and what a different person I was.



He was right. I had changed—and in my opinion, it was for the
better. And for the first time in a long time, my opinion was the one
that mattered to me.
After that call, I quit my job at Studio West. While I adored my
position and the people I worked with, staying felt awkward. I needed
to leave Playboy totally behind me. Plus, I was no longer feeling challenged. Hef had very cookie-cutter preferences when it came to Playmate shoots and layouts, so it wasn’t long before I could do the job in
my sleep. I felt like I wasn’t learning anything anymore.
Over the next year, I would routinely pick up the latest issue of
Playboy to see the published pictorials. I was surprised to see the take
on the Shannon twins in their pictorial. While the sunny, fresh-faced
tennis-themed photos that I directed (the same shoot that was seen on
The Girls Next Door) were still included, the rest of the pictorial had a
distinctly different flavor. The girls had been styled as “Mansion Mistresses” lying on top of each other on a floatie in the mansion pool, one
of them donning Hef’s signature captain’s hat, seductively straddling
each other on Bridget’s former bed and climbing the grand staircase in
nothing but cheap, stripper-store rhinestone jewelry.
So much for the girl next door, I thought. The title of our reality
show was inspired by the way Hef described the ideal Playmate back
in the ’50s when he launched the magazine. Most women pictured in
other publications of the era wore heavy makeup and very stylized
hair. Hef wanted something different. He wanted his Playmates to
look young and fresh-faced, not like “someone’s older sister,” which
was how he described the look of most models at the time.
Criss seemed absolutely thrilled that I had quit my job. He’d been
pestering me to leave and insisted I use his publicity and management
teams. Since Playboy PR had long ago started giving me the cold
shoulder, I accepted.



Over the few months that I was with Criss, my heart would sink
any time I would see magazine articles featuring Bridget and Kendra
together. It seemed as if Playboy PR was still working for them, and
suddenly the two girls were pushed like never before. I was never contacted to be a part of the photo spreads and interviews, though, and it
hurt to be the only one left out. Despite the other two girls moving on
to new men, I was the only one Hef was determined to punish. In the
media, Hef would always say what a great girlfriend I had been and
that I was welcome back in his life at any time (which would always
send Criss into a fury), but in reality he wasn’t being friendly towards
me.
Criss’s explosive temper was becoming increasingly more alarming. I didn’t want to go back to the mansion, Criss knew that, but it
was as if he couldn’t help his jealousy. For all his fame, fortune, and
success, Criss, to me, seemed cripplingly insecure.
This was starting to feel all too familiar.
Before I met Criss, I had seen his television show and thought he
was cute. Had I dug a little deeper and done some research on the guy,
perhaps I would have been more hesitant to get into a relationship
with him.
According to reports in the press, earlier that year Criss had
threatened Las Vegas Review-Journal columnist Norm Clarke in public, screaming, “Don’t ever write another word about me or you’ll need
an eye patch over your other eye.” The confrontation was written
about in the paper and online, but I wasn’t aware of it until I had
already started dating Criss. Many of his public rants, though,
happened after I left him. Apparently, he singled Perez Hilton out in
his audience one night and called him “the world’s biggest douchebag
asshole”; and magician Joe Monti filed a police report that alleged
Criss “flipped out” and assaulted him. Monti produced an audiotape



with a voice that is allegedly Criss’s saying, “Get out of my place before
I knock you out.” I wasn’t surprised by any of it after what I had
experienced.
In the beginning, any fame I had, Criss loved. That was what
made our relationship such a publicity boon for him, after all. But as
time went on, his jealousy seemed to get the best of him.
I remember him barking at me to cover up my hair as he yanked
my hoodie over my head. He then went on to complain that my bright
blond hair was attracting too much attention.
It was true. Even in his resident casino, people would often spot
me before recognizing him.
After an amazing Elton John concert at Caesars Palace, we went
backstage to say hello to the friendly pop legend. His dressing room
walls were covered with shelves adorned with a massive bobblehead
doll collection.
“You have my bobblehead!” I squealed, pointing at two of my
dolls nestled in among the immense collection. I have to admit: it was
a total fangirl moment. I mean, who doesn’t love Elton John?! It was
crazy, spotting my dolls in his dressing room.
Criss snapped that he had his own bobblehead coming out, shooting me a death glance.
Who gets jealous of their girlfriend like that? I thought. We were
supposed to be on the same team, but it was starting to feel more like
we were in a one-sided “who is more famous” pissing contest.
Before my last trip back to Los Angeles, I told Criss I planned to
stay an extra day to take my car to the shop so that I could have some
repairs done. He threw a fit, accused me of not caring about him, and
told me I should put my car in his warehouse.
Already Criss had suggested I begin storing my valuables in his
safe—including my diamond watch and the two pieces of jewelry he’d



already lavished on me. To me, my car was a reflection of my independence. It didn’t feel right locking it away—and, honestly, Criss’s
apparent fascination with hoarding my valuables was beginning to
make me uncomfortable. I canceled the car appointment and never
mentioned it again—the last thing I wanted to do was put my car in his
warehouse, and thankfully, I never did. Still, despite any trepidation
that may have crept into my mind, I still wanted to believe we had a
shot at making it together. It’s easy to stand on the outside now and
list the ways this relationship was clearly doomed, but I didn’t have
anything to compare it to. I had never been in a healthy, committed
adult relationship before, so I didn’t even know what was missing.
With all my doubts, Criss seemed passionately in love with me and
that was what mattered to me at that time.
The declarations of love from Criss flowed freely and he talked in
front of his friends about wanting to settle down with me. He took me
back home with him to Long Island to show me off to everyone he
knew. As the holidays approached, I was treated like I was already a
member of his family. Since we were both December babies, I began
thinking ahead to our birthdays. Criss had already scheduled our joint
birthday celebration to be held at his favorite night spot, LAX, but I
also wanted to keep a tradition that I’d developed over the last several
years: a trip to Disneyland with a group of friends. Near my birthday,
Criss and I planned a day trip to the Magic Kingdom and invited my
usual guest list, which included a few girls from the mansion.
As the day grew closer, my mansion “friends” suddenly became
unavailable.
“You won’t believe it,” said one of the girls who lived at the Bunny
House. “Hef heard you were going to Disneyland for your birthday and
decided to take his new girlfriends the same day you’re going.”



Seriously? I thought. Hef abandoned making the trek down to
Anaheim years earlier. He suffered from chronic back pain, so having
to walk more than a few steps at a time was incredibly uncomfortable
for him. What are the chances that he all of sudden decided to go to
Disneyland on the very same day I would be there celebrating my
birthday? It was a pathetic attempt to get in my face and perhaps try to
remind me of his earlier accusation: that the girls were my friends only
as long as I was his girlfriend.
“I don’t know what to do,” she grumbled. “He invited me to go
with him and I feel like I can’t say no because I live in his house. This
is really awkward.”
Several of the girls called to explain that they wouldn’t be going
with either of us. It was obvious Hef was trying to force them to pick
sides—and they didn’t want to get involved.
If Hef wanted to go to Disneyland, that’s fine, I told myself. He
wouldn’t deter my birthday celebration. Criss and I ended up spending
the afternoon by ourselves. I asked our tour guide to help keep me
from running into Hef’s group, which was also on a guided tour, which
I’m sure soured Hef’s plans of ruining my day and flaunting the guests
he had ripped away from my celebration.
Despite the fact that we avoided Hef, it still wasn’t the most relaxed day at the park. Criss spent the whole day trying to orchestrate
“candid” paparazzi shots without seeming obvious, which I found embarrassing. I never mind having my photo taken, but I hated his
sneaking around. The way he tried to hide his oh-so-obvious agenda
from our tour guide made him look, to me, like a complete idiot. This
was the first time I felt embarrassed to be with him, and it wouldn’t be
the last.
Back in Vegas, Criss and I filmed a TV segment together for a local New Year’s Eve special. The bubbly reporter who interviewed us was



very interested in the diamond ring that sparkled on my finger. It
wasn’t an engagement ring, but the large diamond birthday gift Criss
bought me piqued the press’s interest nonetheless.
For Criss’s birthday, I wanted to get him something special. But
what do you get the man who has everything—or at least could afford
to buy himself anything he could ever want? I started reading interviews he had done online, hoping that it might offer me a clue or two.
Criss had told a reporter that he was a huge fan of Salvador Dalí.
I’d never heard him mention art before, but why would he make
something like that up? During one of my final trips to Los Angeles, I
tracked down a rare Salvador Dalí print at a Beverly Hills gallery.
When I gave him the present, Criss tried to act impressed and
thanked me vigorously, but didn’t offer too much more. His manager,
who was also in the room, seemed way more impressed than Criss.
Huh, I thought. Maybe he doesn’t really care about art after all.
This was just one example of how the public Criss and the private Criss
seemed like two very different people to me.
For Christmas, I played it a bit safer. Criss had mentioned wanting to shoot a snowboarding episode of Mindfreak, so I commissioned
Burton to create a custom snowboard and snowboarding gear. Believe
it or not, he actually had the gall to ask me if Burton did that for me
for free. So much for its being the thought that counts! All Criss
seemed to care about counting was pennies.
In return, Criss showered me with an audacious diamond cross
necklace—making the previous pendant he bought me pale in comparison. He also presented me with another necklace, this one with a
large diamond-encrusted infinity symbol pendant. On the back, next
to the clasp, was a little charm that read, in tiny diamonds, “XO CA.”



Reading the huge smile on my face, Criss whispered that he had
designed this especially for me and that he’d never designed jewelry
for anyone before, not even his wife.
Criss had been married before, to his hometown sweetheart, but
they filed for divorce after she learned that he had been spotted with
an A-list movie actress. Criss never missed an opportunity to remind
me of his high-profile conquests.
“Wow,” I exclaimed, truly breathless at these elaborate gifts. “I
don’t know what to say. I love them!” He picked me up in a huge hug.
No one had ever lavished me with such elaborate romantic gestures before. Even though Hef had dropped a few pieces of jewelry on
me, they were always pieces of mass-produced Playboy-branded merchandise, made even less personal by the fact that identical pieces
were given to his other girlfriends at the same time.
To me, it was the care that mattered . . . not the carats.
Criss offered to fly my parents to Las Vegas to celebrate the holidays with us. I was impressed and flattered that he showed such an
active interest in getting to know my family, something Hef had never
done.
“I think Holly should have her own perfume,” Criss told my parents one evening over dinner. “The slogan could be Holly Madison:
Bring Out the Bunny in You.”
My dad couldn’t help but stifle a laugh.
“Can you even use that?” he asked Criss. “Isn’t that kind of a Playboy thing?”
Criss was beside himself. He’d spent his entire career surrounded
by yes people, so he was completely at a loss for words and clearly uncomfortable that someone dared disagree with his idea. Ever the entertainer, Criss could charm the pants off anyone (in some cases . . .



literally), but I was disappointed to learn that, just an inch below the
surface, he didn’t appear to be the sharpest tool in the shed.
Whenever he announced his next “great idea,” I usually fell silent.
I didn’t have the heart, for instance, to tell him that I wasn’t interested
in cohosting a regularly scheduled “LoveSex” Pool Party (yes, that was
the real name he actually came up with) at the Luxor with him. I felt
sorry for him and didn’t want to embarrass him.
Criss asked me what my parents thought of him as we rode the elevator back up to his suite. He was clearly in need of some affirmation.
“They liked you,” I said with a big smile. After all, they hadn’t told
me they didn’t like him. My parents confided in me that they found
him a bit controlling, but they were seeing things I wasn’t necessarily
ready to accept. On the other hand, they saw that I appeared truly
happy. Plus, seeing me with a man closer to my own age had to be a lot
easier to swallow.
He then asked me if I had told them I was “in love” with him.
“Um, I told them I really liked you,” I offered honestly. I’d already
moved in with him, adopted so much of his life, and gushed relentlessly about him to the press. I wasn’t going to profess my undying
love to my parents after just four months of dating, no matter how
much of a whirlwind our time together had been or how often we said
it to one another.
Criss pouted, crossing his arms, turning away from me, and,
grumbling, asking why he was even wasting time on this relationship.
“Hey,” I said defensively, “I don’t introduce my parents to many
people. This was a really big deal for me.”
THE WARM MEXICAN SUN beat down on my shoulders as Criss and I sat
at our beachside table eating sushi and drinking Coke Lights with our



friends Barbara and Ron. Enjoying a few days off from the show, Criss
swept me away to Cabo San Lucas for a late January getaway.
“We’re going to miss you guys,” I bemoaned to Barbara beneath a
perfect cloudless Cabo sky after a boating excursion. The couple’s trip
overlapped with ours for only a few days. They were longtime friends
of Criss’s—and would soon become close friends of mine. The couple
kept conversations lively and fun—they were the perfect antidote to
the dark energy that I was starting to feel from Criss more and more
lately.
“Let me give you my info,” Barbara said. “Text me any time you’re
bored and want to go to lunch or something.”
“Thanks!” I said, pocketing the business card with Barbara’s
information.
After we finished our leisurely lunch and said our good-byes, Criss
and I went back to our suite.
Criss snapped at me as soon as the door had shut behind him. He
demanded I give him the card and forbade me from texting her.
“Why?” I asked, confused. She seemed really sweet, but perhaps
there was something about her I didn’t know.
He put his hand out, motioning with his fingers for me to cough
up the card. He gave me a lame excuse about Barbara being “over the
top.” It was clear that he presumed this was an acceptable explanation
and he considered the conversation over.
Begrudgingly I handed the card over to Criss. Thankfully, I had
already saved her number in my phone while we were still at lunch.
After the holidays, I finally began recognizing Criss’s behavior as unusually possessive. In addition to his unreasonable temper tantrums,
hoarding my most valuable possessions, and encouraging me to quit
my job, he was showing yet another troubling sign: isolating me from
my friends. He didn’t want me spending time with anyone else. He



often found excuses to keep me away from my phone and recently
began demanding to see it when he saw me texting. Needless to say, I
was scared of where this relationship was going.
For the remainder of the trip, Cabo was hardly as relaxing. I soon
learned that TMZ was reporting on our vacation. I never spotted the
photographers; judging by the photos, they appeared to be shooting us
from boats off the coast or from neighboring hotel balconies. I later
learned that Criss tipped off the paparazzi—he never turned down an
opportunity for more press to distract from his show, which was now
seeing more horrendous reviews. A review in the Los Angeles Times
had recently said: “If Criss Angel were blindfolded, straitjacketed, run
over by a steamroller, locked in a steel box and dumped from a helicopter into the Pacific Ocean, he still might be easier to salvage from
disaster than ‘Criss Angel: Believe.’ ” Yikes.
That night Criss and I got into an awful fight—one of the first of
many dramatic rows that would soon become a constant theme in the
remaining weeks of our short-lived relationship. While the catalyst for
the fights varied, the arguments themselves became somewhat formulaic. Here’s how I would describe them:
1. Criss would become insanely jealous—usually a trigger associated with Playboy.
2. He’d accuse me of being a slut.
3. He’d say we should break up.
4. Criss would freak out if I didn’t try to convince him otherwise or make attempts to “save the relationship.” (I never
did try to save the relationship during these tantrums. His
outbursts scared me!)
5. He’d calm down and tell me what a wonderful person I
was and how lucky he was to be with a sweet girl like me.



6. He would then take me in his arms and tell me he loved
me.
I barely said anything during these rants, especially during the
parts when I felt him getting hostile. His anger seemed irrational to
me and was somewhat terrifying. By this time it had become clear to
me that I had traded in one controlling megalomaniac for another. If
there was one thing you could say about me at that time, it was that I
definitely had a type! There were differences, though: Hef was a master of manipulation and knew how to cripple a girl’s self-esteem. Criss,
on the other hand, just scared me. His anger filled a room, and while
he never threw a punch at me, I was scared that something of that
nature might be lurking around a corner.
Once again I was sleeping with the enemy. Only this time instead
of being trapped behind the mansion walls, I was Rapunzel locked
high away in the penthouse of the Luxor hotel. Criss had become so
controlling that security shadowed my every move—I wasn’t even allowed to go downstairs to grab a Starbucks in the lobby without a security guard or assistant being ordered to follow me.
I started to wonder: Was I really any better off than I had been at
the mansion?
AFTER OUR TRIP TO Cabo, Criss’s performance schedule started to catch
up with him physically. He no longer had the energy for any of the offday excursions we used to do—and during his on days, I had no choice
but to adopt his routine. Criss wanted me to be with him 24/7 and he
balked when I asked to go on simple errands by myself. We slept in
most of the day, ate Mexican food in bed, and headed straight backstage two hours before the curtains went up so Criss could begin his



preshow ritual: get an hour-long massage, eat a sandwich, and sit for
hair and makeup.
And I thought mansion life got monotonous! Not only was I beyond bored, but my body ached from lack of exercise and activity.
Fueled by his failing show, recently called “a dog” by Variety,
Criss’s treacherous outbursts became more and more frequent. I spent
most days walking on eggshells, hoping to avoid yet another land
mine. My nerves were so frayed that I often felt faint and nauseous,
causing female members of his staff to joke that perhaps I was
pregnant.
As I was showering one day, Criss popped his head into the stall.
With a false air of casualness, he said he saw that Bridget was hosting
a Valentine’s Day party in town that week and asked me if I was planning on going. I think he was itching for a fight.
I felt my body weaken and the light start to darken as my eyes
rolled towards the back of my head. Criss swooped me up before my
knees could buckle, pulled me out of the shower, and ran over to place
me on his bed. He grabbed his terry cloth robe to lay over me and
snatched a leftover chocolate cookie from Subway that was sitting on
his dresser.
“Here, eat this,” he said, tossing it to me from across the room.
“What happened?”
“I don’t know,” I uttered breathlessly. “I just felt really faint all of
a sudden.”
I unwrapped the cookie and took a few bites as he stood over me
and watched.
“I didn’t plan on going to Bridget’s party,” I finally said. “I didn’t
think you’d want to.”
I was scared to mention Bridget in front of Criss. He had become
so controlling, always demanding to look at my phone and trying to



keep me from seeing or speaking to any of my friends. He seemed to
have a major problem with Kendra ever since she announced her plans
to marry Hank at the mansion (which I always thought was a strange
choice, considering the Kendra I thought I knew would probably have
preferred a beach wedding). Criss was wild with jealousy at the very
thought that I might attend.
Apparently, that was the right answer, because his spirits immediately brightened.
“No, let’s go to her party!” Criss said, in what had become a rare
moment of happiness. I continued lying in bed for a moment, enjoying
my cookie, my boyfriend’s good mood, and the security in knowing he
had just rushed to care for me. I was so relieved to have avoided another major blowout that I didn’t even worry about what caused me to
feel faint in the first place.
In the first few months of 2009, my primary occupation was being
Criss’s moral and emotional support. When he flew to Los Angeles to
tape a segment on Larry King Live, I traveled with him.
“Do you want to go on with Criss?” one of his managers had asked
me as Criss was being summoned onto set.
Huh? I thought. I didn’t come here to be on the show. I thought
I’d just be sitting in the greenroom with the rest of the entourage that
made the trip to Los Angeles.
“No, I’m okay,” I said, waving my hands at Criss as if to say “go
ahead without me.”
Criss pleaded with me to go with him, gesturing towards the
sound guy, who was already holding a second mic pack.
I didn’t feel like I had a choice in the matter.
“Uh, okay,” I said, hesitantly, thanking God I wore makeup that
day and wondering what I would talk about.



I didn’t realize it at the time, but apparently I was the sideshow
attraction that was to be trotted out to distract viewers from the disastrous show reviews that Larry would certainly be bringing up. I had
become used to being used for publicity at this point, but was still
completely surprised by this particular ambush. Before I had been
used for photo ops, planted articles, and local Las Vegas programs, but
this was prime time, national television. It felt very uncomfortable.
“So . . . you’ve been on this show before,” Larry said, giving me a
pointed look. In 2005, I’d appeared on Larry King Live with Hef,
Bridget, and Kendra to promote The Girls Next Door. It was obvious
to me what he was thinking. To him, it seemed as if I was jumping
from one rich boyfriend to the next with no purpose or pursuits of my
own beyond being professional arm candy.
And in a way he was right. It hadn’t been my intention, but the relationship with Criss proved so controlling and consuming that I
hadn’t been able to make any professional moves of my own. All of
those dreams that I had been so enthusiastic about just a few months
before had been shoved under the rug as my primary focus became being at Criss’s side. Once again a lightbulb went on, and I resolved right
then and there that I needed to make a change.
It had become increasingly clear to me that I had jumped headfirst into this relationship way too soon. Having striven hard for fame
the first 35 years of his life, Criss was an expert at putting on a charming facade and being able to win people over. After I had spent several
months with him, the facade faded and I started to see what was underneath, what the real Criss was like. I learned that our views on
politics and most social issues were vastly different. He had a fifthgrader’s sense of humor. (His entourage had to muster up convincing
fake laughs every time he repeated the same joke we’d heard a million
times.) I found him to be unintelligent and he seemed virtually



illiterate. (He misused the word “misnomer” so much—even during interviews—that it made me cringe for him.)
It was disappointing to realize how incompatible we were, but I
cared about him, so initially I just felt sorry for him. But as time went
on, I saw a mean, bullying, and deceptive side of him, and I started to
get disgusted. I had been so enchanted by this man and by my overwhelming desire to feel loved and needed that I hadn’t even taken the
time to get to know him before committing myself to him. I realized I
needed an exit strategy. And fast.
Criss insisted that I be present for every one of his performances.
In the beginning, I would watch the show from a seat in the audience—and Criss would manage to work my name into the narrative
and introduce me at the end, along with his family. Initially I thought
it was sweet, but it soon became embarrassing. Eventually he would
suggest that I wait backstage with his bodyguard, which meant I would
be there to greet Criss during his quick between-scene changes. He
told me that having me there helped the shows go by faster for him.
My mind was on my next step. Every time Criss went back on
stage, I used those few minutes to pull out my BlackBerry and add to a
list of what I needed to do. He was with me every other minute of the
day, so this was my only chance. I quickly made the list: find an apartment in Las Vegas, contact Crazy Horse Paris (Criss had successfully
talked me out of accepting their offer to guest star), get my valuables
out of Criss’s safe, etc. I wrote all of this in French so Criss wouldn’t be
able to read the notes the next time he snatched my phone away from
me.
“Who are you texting?” the bodyguard sneered at me, throwing
me a suspicious look.
“No one,” I said as I pocketed my phone. “I’m just writing down
some ideas.”



I WAS DONE. I had gone to bed finally ready to leave Criss. He had started another one of his one-sided arguments over nothing and I had
had enough. I didn’t even try to engage him, and instead quietly sat
through the rant until he calmed down and I was finally able to go to
sleep.
The next morning, his fit clearly wasn’t over. He stormed out of
the master bathroom, tearing up a Valentine’s Day card I had given
him featuring my pinup portrait by Olivia on the front. Criss was
screaming about having just noticed that the rendering included a pair
of curled-up pink bunny ears on top of my head, striking a deep nerve
in him.
Criss finally said that he thought I should go back to my parents
and that he would buy me a plane ticket.
“Okay,” I said, barely louder than a whisper. I was afraid to argue
with him. I silently congratulated myself on this easy out he had just
provided me.
He stormed out of the room and yelled loudly to one of his assistants to book me on a flight to Portland that afternoon.
I crept out of bed and began gathering what I needed. Luckily, I
still had a perpetually packed suitcase at the ready for my back-andforth-to-L.A. trips that had come to an immediate halt a few months
earlier.
Criss asked me if I wanted to wear my jewelry, slyly eyeing the
vintage Gucci watch I had purchased for myself, my small cross necklace, and the ring he had given me.
“Yes,” I replied without thinking. It never occurred to me that he
would actually expect the gifts back. After all, I had bought him expensive things, too.



When I finally pulled my things—and myself—together, I walked
out into the living room of the suite. Criss’s bodyguard was standing
by to drive me to the airport.
“Bye,” I said, giving Criss a cold, distant hug.
“Take care,” he said just as coolly, before planting a kiss on my
head and asking me to let him know that I got in safe.
“I DON’T KNOW WHAT’S wrong with me,” I cried through a stream of
tears. “It’s like, I know he’s an asshole and I know he’s not good for
me, but I’m still so sad. I don’t get it.”
I was home in Oregon; the same place where I had decided to
pack up my little red Celica nearly a decade earlier. In some ways, it
was as if nothing had changed and I was back where I started. I had no
job, no man, and no prospects lined up. Luckily my close friend Sara
Underwood lived in Portland and spent an afternoon listening to me
as I poured my heart out. She was an absolute angel and held my hand
through my frequent sobs. I was so grateful to have her there. She
listened and offered me the best advice she could, but the real problem
wasn’t obvious to either of us at that point.
Yes, I had just embarked on a high-profile romance that went
wrong, quickly and dramatically, but that wasn’t really where my emotional crash was coming from. I was suddenly having to deal with my
transition from the twisted world of Playboy into the real world. It
was the unavoidable emotional fallout that had been postponed by my
whirlwind romance with Criss.
What was I going to do now? I thought, feeling hopeless.
After a week in Oregon, my dad drove me to the airport and I
boarded a flight to Los Angeles. I had no idea what was going to



happen next, but I was determined to brave the storm, despite the
heavy burden of sadness I carried onto the plane with me.
Criss’s voice echoed in my mind, telling me I needed to go back to
California. During a few of his tantrums, when he was mulling over a
breakup out loud, he would always banish me to California, as if he
owned Las Vegas.
Where I go and what I do isn’t your prerogative, I thought, as if I
now had a chance to respond to one of his treacherous rants.
I felt like Hef was trying to sabotage me in Los Angeles by badmouthing me and leaving me out of Girls Next Door–related press,
and now Criss was trying to banish me from Las Vegas.
Sorry, boys, it’s not going to be that easy, I thought, pulling my
hoodie over my head. I felt the rumbling of the plane engines beneath
my seat. You haven’t seen the last of me.

CHAPTER 13

For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had
happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that
very few things indeed were really impossible.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

A

fter my breakup with Criss, I returned to La-La Land absolutely
lost. I knew that I wanted a successful career, but I didn’t know how to
go about achieving it. Since arriving back in Los Angeles, I was still
reeling from the emotional fallout of my relationships with both Hef
and Criss. For the first time in almost eight years, I was entirely on my
own, but this time, I was carrying a whole load of emotional baggage
behind me. What am I going to do next?
God bless Mary O’Connor. After I had spent all those years at the
mansion, Mary became more than a friend to me . . . she became like
family. When she and her partner, “Captain Bob,” invited me to stay in
their spare bedroom while I got my feet on the ground, I couldn’t have
been more grateful. While she remained Hef’s loyal and loving secretary for more than 40 years, Mary was also a compassionate woman
who knew I needed her (and knew damn well that Hef respected her
too much to ever reprimand her for taking me in).



Of course I had my own apartment in Santa Monica, but I had become terrified of being by myself. I was desperately lonely and didn’t
feel at ease in my apartment. There was no security at my building and
the neighborhood in Santa Monica where it was located didn’t feel
very safe after dark. Every night I noticed a truck parked across the
street from my living room window with a man sitting in the driver’s
seat for hours. I have no idea why he was there, but I found it creepy.
What I needed most was a comfortable, safe atmosphere surrounded
by people I loved and who wanted the best for me. It was the only way
I could be sure that my next decision would be a smart one. I was
scared of making another bad choice because I was anxious, lonely, or
desperate.
Despite Hef and the producers’ incessant lobbying for my return
to the mansion and the series (even though Crystal and the twins were
already occupying our former spots), Mary encouraged me to make
the best decision for me and to follow my heart.
“It’s better for you to be on your own,” she told me. Mary had a
wonderfully maternal nature—and I often looked to her for guidance.
“You need to live your life. There’s not much you can really do at the
mansion.”
A few days after I arrived, I contacted Criss’s assistant about shipping out everything I’d left behind in my hasty departure. When the
boxes arrived on Mary’s doorstep, I burst into tears. I knew I didn’t
want to be with Criss, but I was still broken. It’s a humbling experience having a stack of cardboard boxes packed neatly with your belongings shipped back to you without even a single word.
I felt like I had been thrown out with the trash.
When news of Criss’s and my breakup eventually leaked to TMZ,
Criss began calling me and sending me nasty text messages accusing
me of tipping off the press.



He angrily accused me of telling “them.” When I asked him who
he meant, he said, “Playboy,” and went on to rant about how he knew
this would happen and angrily said that I had better be saying he
broke up with me.
There could have been no greater way of insulting Criss than if
people assumed that I had been the one who actually wanted out of
the relationship. I honestly didn’t care what people thought—I was just
happy to be a safe distance away from him.
We had barely spoken since I left him in Las Vegas that morning,
so needless to say, we never really discussed how we were going to
handle our very public breakup with the press. I didn’t know who told
TMZ about our dissolution (since I had only informed my family and a
few friends), but it seemed Criss was irate because he had his own
ideas about how he would announce our split. Since we still shared the
same publicist, we both got an email from him asking what kind of
“joint statement” we would like to make about the breakup.
Criss responded first, demanding that he tell them nothing.
Our publicist quickly replied:
We have to tell the press something. If you don’t, no one will
want to cover you the next time you date a celebrity.
Ouch, I thought, hit him where it hurts.
Eventually, we agreed to make a statement saying we broke up
amicably due to scheduling differences—regardless of the fact that I
had nothing to schedule. I don’t know if anyone bought the excuse, but
I didn’t really care. The media and the public had become so used to
seeing Criss run through starlets for publicity that I doubt many
people ever believed our relationship was genuine . . . I was possibly
the only one who had!
Now that my relationship with Criss was behind me, I could finally focus on my future. Though I was tempted to waste away in



Mary’s spare room, I knew I had to take action. At the insistence of
Criss, I had turned down most of the opportunities that had come my
way shortly after I left the mansion—most of which Criss’s jealousy
didn’t allow for. Besides Mary, no one associated with Playboy or
Girls Next Door would have anything to do with me, unless I abandoned my own dignity and returned to the mansion, which was the
last thing I would do.
No, I thought. I’m starting from scratch—and I’m doing it on my
own.
I made a list of the things I still hoped to accomplish in my life
and career. Being able to see my goals spelled out in front of me was
an important part of the process.
For my career, my list was pretty specific:
1. Develop a reality series that showcases the real
Holly—apart from Girls Next Door, Playboy, and Hef.
2. Star in a Las Vegas show.
3. Appear on Dancing with the Stars.
The list went on, but those were my main goals. Prior to leaving
the mansion, I had interviewed for Dancing with the Stars and even
met the producers. I had fallen in love with the series when its second
season aired in 2006. The contestants looked like they were having so
much fun and I couldn’t take my eyes off contestant Stacy Keibler’s
flashy costumes. Although I wasn’t a dancer, I was dying to be on the
show—it looked like the contestants were having the time of their
lives! But despite how popular The Girls Next Door was at the time,
rumor had it that one of the show’s producers didn’t think Middle
America could relate to a young woman who lived with an old man like
Hugh Hefner. Determined to one day appear on the series, I tried



revisiting the idea two months earlier during a meeting with Criss’s
managers (this was during the period he insisted on “shaping” my
career).
“So I called Dancing with the Stars,” Criss’s manager began,
“since you told me you were interested in it, but they’ve already cast
their upcoming season.”
Criss remarked snidely that Dancing with the Stars was a show
for “has-beens” and the only person to have ever done it right was
Marie Osmond, because she did it right before she opened her show in
Vegas.
None of my career ideas were up to Criss’s standard, so this
one—like many others—was shot down.
After making my list, I decided that tomorrow would be the beginning of a fresh start. I knew what I hoped to achieve; now I charged
myself with the task of going out there and making it happen. Deep
down I knew that I would be okay. For the first time in weeks, I felt
optimistic about my future. I knew I needed to gather my strength, so
I decided to let myself sleep in before somehow starting a new life the
next day.
When I crawled out of bed later the next morning, I noticed I had
three missed calls and voice mails from the same number on my
BlackBerry. Each was from a producer at Dancing with the Stars urgently looking to get ahold of me.
Holy shit, I thought! Was I dreaming this? I listened to the voice
mails again just to make sure I hadn’t completely taken a dive off the
deep end. The producer had hoped she had the right number, since
she was calling the phone number they had listed on my file from the
first time I interviewed.
It was such an uncanny coincidence that I had to believe that
someone above was answering my prayers. Since they had just



announced the season eight roster a few weeks earlier (and the series
was actually premiering the following week), I figured that casting directors must be beginning their search for the following season’s
hopefuls.
“Hi, this is Holly Madison returning your call,” I said nervously
into my cell phone to whichever bigwig I had just happened to call. (In
all the excitement, I didn’t even remember the name of the person
who had called me.)
The producer confided (after swearing me to confidentiality) that
singer/songwriter Jewel had seriously injured herself during rehearsals and they were desperately in need of a quick replacement.
“Would you be willing to do it?” she asked expectantly. “You
would only have four days to learn your routine, while every other contestant has already had a month’s worth of rehearsals.”
“Are you kidding? Of course!” I gleefully shouted into the phone. I
couldn’t believe my luck. “Absolutely. Thank you so much. I’m beyond
grateful for this opportunity,” I continued to stammer, positively beside myself. “I can’t believe it!”
She seemed totally relieved and let out a big laugh. It was meant
to be! After giving her all my current contact information, I called my
publicist, telling him the good news and swearing him to secrecy. My
addition to the DWTS cast was supposed to be kept quiet until they
announced it live on the premier episode.
The next few days were an absolute Cinderella story. After signing
the contract with Dancing, I was immediately whisked off to meet my
new partner, Dmitry Chaplin (a new DWTS talent who graduated from
TV’s other juggernaut dance series, So You Think You Can Dance).
Production provided me with my first set of dance shoes for our rehearsal. Eight hours of practice later, my feet had erupted in terrible
blisters, but I didn’t care. I lined the shoes with moleskin before



returning the next morning. Not even the pain in my feet could
dampen my spirits as I skipped my way back to the studio, eager to
continue our routine.
Our first number was a cha-cha to Lady Gaga’s anthem “Just
Dance.” I was overcome with excitement. Could they have chosen a
more perfect song for this particular time of my life? After the second
day of rehearsals, I was swept away to the office of Emmy-award-winning costume designer Randall Christensen on the CBS lot to begin fittings for my first outfit. (Side note: While the series airs on ABC, it’s
actually shot on the CBS lot in West Hollywood.)
Reminiscent of Hollywood’s golden age, the costumes for each
DWTS episode are crafted in-house each week. In what felt like no
time, Christensen whipped up a short, vibrant orange dress drenched
in beaded fringe and Swarovski crystals. It was absolutely to die for.
Even though I was the new girl on set, the producers, cast, and crew
couldn’t have been more welcoming. Everyone was an absolute delight
to work with—and seemingly grateful that I agreed to step in at the
very last minute. Little did they know that this was the break I had
been praying for—an opportunity when I truly needed it most.
Was I nervous to perform my newly learned dance in front of a
live studio audience and 22 million viewers watching live at home?
Duh! But not too nervous to forget to have fun and enjoy my moment
in the spotlight (without any ominous boyfriend hovering over me). As
long as I remembered the routine, I was going to be okay. My priority
was to have a good time, work hard, and of course enjoy wearing the
fabulous, sparkly costumes!
Over the course of my tenure on the show, my scores were mediocre, my dancing wasn’t great, and the eight-hour rehearsals, five
days a week were brutal, but I was having the time of my life. After
practice, I’d make the drive back to Mary and Captain Bob’s home in



the Valley and collapse on my bed. For the next month, my life would
be: eat, sleep, dance, repeat.
After my debut, Criss eventually reached out to me to offer his
congratulations. With distance and a bit of time between us, it appeared we could be civil. Some of his messages were very flirty or
risqué, but I didn’t bite. I had heard through the grapevine that he had
already moved on and was living with his current girlfriend. Plus, I
knew Criss well enough to be certain that any sort of affirmation I was
getting from him was most likely motivated by the new positive publicity I was receiving for being a part of the DWTS cast. For my part, I
didn’t resent him for how he had treated me, even though I could
have. Instead of wallowing in the past, I chose to happily close that
chapter of my life and be satisfied that we seemed to be on good terms.
“SO YOU SAY, ‘I’M Holly, I was one of Hugh Hefner’s girlfriends at the
Playboy Mansion,’ ” directed Freddie, a DWTS field producer, from
behind the camera.
“Umm,” I stalled. “I don’t really want to say that. Can I say
something else?”
“That’s what they have here for you to say,” Freddie said, looking
down at his notes. “I mean, that’s how people know you.”
He didn’t mean it as a jab; there’s no way he could fully appreciate
how negative that association was to me or that I was so eager to separate myself from Hef.
“Can I say, ‘I’m Holly, I starred on the television show The Girls
Next Door’?” I meekly and politely suggested, praying he would take
the bait. I was so grateful for the opportunity and—despite the contract and grueling blisters—I was still slightly terrified the rug could be



pulled out from under me, so I didn’t want to go against even their
smallest wish, but I just couldn’t be labeled as Hef’s ex. Not this time.
Silence.
Obviously this wasn’t my first foray into reality television and I
knew the executive producers had given Freddie the sound bites they
wanted to hear. It was his job to make sure we stuck to the script.
He thought about it a minute longer.
“Why don’t you say, ‘Hi, I’m Holly, I was one of Hugh Hefner’s
girlfriends at the Playboy Mansion on the show The Girls Next Door,’ ”
Freddie suggested, hoping this would satisfy my concerns.
“I’m not going to say the girlfriend part,” I said through a sheepish smile. I knew I was pushing the envelope. I didn’t want to be difficult, but I had to finally stand up for my own dignity and self-respect.
“I’m sorry. I’m just tired of being branded that way. I mean, no one
else would introduce themselves as somebody’s ex-girlfriend or boyfriend, you know?”
“Okay. If you absolutely don’t want to say it,” Freddie conceded
with a shrug.
In the end, I introduced myself as “I’m Holly Madison. I’ve been
on the cover of Playboy four times and I starred in a reality series
called The Girls Next Door.”
Producers got their Playboy reference and I was able to stand
Hef-free for the first time. One battle down, countless more to go . . .
Being branded as “Hef’s ex” was a label that would continue to
haunt me for years, but one I would always fight against. I refused to
let that be the most defining thing in my life.
Besides the one-time introduction and a legitimately funny
Playboy-related joke (where fellow contestant Belinda Carlisle said,
“I’m the former Miss August,” then contestant Denise Richards said, “I
was Miss December,” and then they cut to me saying, “I’ve been Miss



February, March, September, and November”), I was able to steer
clear of any Hef/Playboy references throughout my run on the series.
When an entertainment news program came to film one of my rehearsals, the interviewer asked, “What do you have to say to Hef wishing you well on Dancing with the Stars?”
He must have read the perplexed look on my face, because I
hadn’t heard anything from Hef since landing on the show.
“We taped a message from him and we want to hear what you
have to say in return,” he explained through forced excitement.
“What’s going on?” I asked my manager disappointedly, looking
over my shoulder at him for help.
“Hey, guys, this is really inappropriate,” he immediately jumped
in. He then suggested the interviewer wrap up the segment.
Of course it would have been great for Hef to wish me well, but I
wasn’t really buying it. If he wanted to say “good luck,” he could have
easily gotten ahold of me. Instead, he used the opportunity to make a
public statement and capitalize on the chance to look like the perfect
gentleman. The whole thing felt insincere to me. A few months earlier,
after Kendra announced her engagement, Hef publicly stated that
she’d be getting married at the mansion and he’d be the one walking
her down the aisle . . . before Kendra even fully agreed to it! (Kendra
later insisted that her brother give her away. It was creepy enough that
she had to get married at her ex-boyfriend’s house.)
Did I really expect any different from Hef? He had been a public
icon for more than half a century, but still, after all this time, he felt
the need to milk every possible publicity opportunity bone-dry. Wounded by the mass exodus of his “beloved” girlfriends, Hef was struggling
to avoid looking like he wasn’t in absolute control of the situation. It
wasn’t enough that he had already restocked the pantry with three



younger, blonder girls, he needed to stay publicly involved in Kendra’s
and my new ventures as if he were still orchestrating our lives.
Who knows, maybe he meant well, but his behavior was suffocating and it motivated me to run even farther and farther away from my
past.
I realized that Dancing could end any week for me, so I couldn’t
allow myself to become complacent. As much as I wanted to completely submerge myself in the show and enjoy every moment, I
needed to quickly identify my next opportunity and strike while the
iron was still hot. I suggested to my manager that we reach out to the
Crazy Horse Paris again to see if they were interested in reopening
our discussions.
“I have something else that I think you might be a good fit for,” he
countered. “There’s a new show opening at Planet Hollywood called
Peepshow and they’re looking to replace the lead every three months.”
From what I had read about Peepshow in Robin Leach’s column
in the Las Vegas Sun, I knew it was a Broadway-influenced revue with
a sexy fairy-tale theme and a sultry “Bo Peep” as the lead character
(hence the show’s name). I’d seen some early marketing of the show
around Las Vegas and didn’t find the ads particularly appealing. In the
posters, a shadowy, mysterious looking Bo Peep and a sinister looking
Red Riding Hood lurked on a black background, the Bo Peep wearing
a stock Trashy Lingerie corset. (Of course, when I finally saw the show,
I realized how little those posters captured its essence and style.)
While it didn’t sound very enticing (especially considering that I was
looking for something more long term), I agreed to take a look once I
could get back to Las Vegas.
In the end, I lasted about a month on Dancing with the Stars and
had simultaneously gotten myself into the best shape of my life. With
all that dancing, I could eat anything I wanted (McDonald’s French



fries with barbecue sauce, anyone?) and I still had a six-pack. After my
elimination, I embarked on a whirlwind press tour: appearing on
Jimmy Kimmel Live (where Jimmy introduced me as one of Hef’s girlfriends. Oy vey!) before being flown to New York for a bunch of interviews and appearances.
I knew that I’d be returning to DWTS in another short month to
perform on the finale along with the other eliminated contestants, so I
was determined to have secured my next gig before then. If I could announce my future plans on the finale, in front of 22 million viewers, it
would be perfect!
With a few weeks to collect my thoughts, I made a special trip to
Las Vegas to catch a performance of Peepshow. During my short stint
there, I fell in love with the newly renovated Planet Hollywood Resort
and Casino. The Peepshow Theater held an impressive 1,500 patrons
(most burlesque shows I had seen capped at around 300).
Wow, I thought. They’re really taking this show seriously.
The theater itself was remodeled specifically for Peepshow, which
told me that both the producers and the hotel intended for the show to
stick around for a while. Large, exquisite props that looked like laced
corsets beautifully covered the lobby’s ceiling as mirrored walls
glistened and glimmered around us like disco balls lined with plush
white Hollywood Regency settees. Around the theater, the “peeping”
keyhole motif was everywhere, and three large runways jetted out
from the stage into the audience. As the lights dimmed and the show
began, larger-than-life LED screens glowed behind the stage showcasing a magnificent black-and-white video of its current star, Kelly
Monaco (a fellow DWTS alum, former Playmate, and soap actress). At
the time, the show had two headliners: the other was former Spice Girl
Mel B., who played the role of “Peep Diva.” Kelly finally entered the
stage wrapped in white acrobat’s silk hanging 30 feet above the



ground. The routines, dance numbers, and acrobatics were jaw dropping. Even though the best routines didn’t even feature Bo Peep, it
didn’t matter. I was seriously impressed.
It felt somehow as if the part of Bo Peep had been written specifically for me. The character begins as a modern-day woman who can’t
find love. After drifting off to sleep one night, she finds herself in
dreamland being led through a series of vignettes—each teaching her
how to be confident and sexy. In the end, she finds her man only after
finding herself.
As the performers took their final bows at the show’s end, I leaned
over and shouted in my manager’s ear (over the deafening applause):
“I want in!”

CHAPTER 14

“What do you know about this business?” the King
said to Alice.
“Nothing,” said Alice.
“Nothing whatever?” persisted the King.
“Nothing whatever,” said Alice.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

I

t turned out that Peepshow wasn’t just any small potatoes Vegas revue, this was serious business—and the creator and mastermind behind the production was none other than Tony-award-winning choreographer Jerry Mitchell. I knew that this could be just the opportunity I’d been hoping for. I officially threw my hat in the ring the next
day. Auditions and interviews for the show were extensive and
brought me back to Las Vegas regularly over the next few weeks.
“Do you guys mind waiting in the other room?” I asked my manager and my friends Angel and Alison. I was preparing for my final
Peepshow audition in front of the show’s director.
“Oh yeah, no problem,” Alison said, motioning everybody into the
next room.



The role required me to wear the skimpiest of costumes, which I
wore as part of the audition process, and I was still a little self-conscious (despite my new DWTS physique) and wanted some privacy.
Contrary to popular belief, just because I had posed nude for a
magazine doesn’t mean I am the most confident, exhibitionistic person in the world. In fact, I was nervous that I wouldn’t look good
enough to be cast. What if I had cellulite? What if my body looked too
“fake”? Seven years of being reminded that I never looked quite good
enough was a hard burden to shake.
Plus, I felt sort of dumb performing the choreography while weaving around all the furniture in the cramped hotel suite. I know it seems
counterintuitive that I was that nervous for the audition, since I was so
eager to perform nightly for a large live audience, but there was
something comforting about knowing that I’d be on a large stage, far
removed from the crowd (with the appropriate distance between us . . .
and, of course, flattering lighting!).
“What if I have tattoos?” I asked Jerry nervously. “And bruises? I
bruise really easily—should I be wearing body makeup?”
“Not unless you want to.” He shrugged, with his signature warm
smile. “Tattoos and things don’t really matter to me. It’s more important that everyone in the cast is different, unique, and comfortable in
their own skin.”
While that should have sounded reassuring, I was far from comfortable in my own skin. I’d spent most of my adult life at the mansion,
being required to clone the other women around me, so the idea of being “unique” was alien. I had a hard time believing that “unique” was
really something anyone would want to see. I couldn’t even wrap my
head around what was unique about me. More and more I worried I
wasn’t right for the part.



After performing the choreography I had learned my audition was
done. Though the producers would assure my manager that I had
done great in the audition, I had no idea if they really thought that or if
they were just giving him a polite answer. I wasn’t particularly confident about my chances. As the month went by, more names were being
floated into consideration and it was rumored that Lindsay Lohan was
the front-runner.
I’m screwed, I thought, my confidence quickly deflating. They’ll
definitely pick her! Imagine the publicity they could get!
One of my Peepshow callbacks happened to land on Hef’s birthday weekend, which he traditionally celebrated at the Palms in Las Vegas. Mary let me know that Bridget, Kendra, and I had been invited to
attend. Naturally, part of me wanted to stay as far away from the man
and his party as possible. But, at the same time, you have to understand that I’d been out of the mansion for only about six months at
this point, and while I was increasingly coming to terms with the hell
Hef had put me through, there was still a part of me that wanted to be
able to walk away on “good terms,” with a clean slate, like all his other
ex-girlfriends. I didn’t want anything from Hef . . . except perhaps for
him to stop bad-mouthing me. Plus, I wanted to see Bridget and
Kendra. Bridget was planning on singing “Happy Birthday” at Moon
Nightclub for the second half of the festivities that night and I wanted
to support her. Be that as it may, I agreed to attend the soiree only if I
could have my own booth. It was proposed that I join Hef in his booth,
but I needed to stand my ground as an individual. I was sick of the attempts to recruit me back into the harem.
I had heard through the grapevine that Crystal Harris had become
Hef’s new main girlfriend. I was thrilled that he had “fallen in love”
again. I hoped her presence on his arm (and the fact that they had just
started filming GND season six) would take some of the pressure off



me. The friends of Hef’s that had previously been so supportive of me
had recently become less kind, believing I had somehow left him in the
lurch. Now maybe things would be different. For my part, I was only
interested in moving forward with positivity, despite anything that had
happened in the past.
The wind was whipping wildly across the Palms Place pool. Since
it was considered a pool party, I chose to wear a black skull-print
bikini and denim skirt, but I may have been better served with a windbreaker! It was awesome seeing the other girls again. Kendra complimented me on my new abs and it was great to meet Hank and to see
Bridget’s new beau, Nick Carpenter. When Hef finally arrived at the
party, new girlfriends in tow, Bridget, Kendra, and I went to say hello
and wish him a happy birthday. I greeted Karissa and Kristina, who
were warm and friendly, and then said hello to Hef, who looked more
pale than usual, but otherwise seemed to be in a relatively good mood.
Next I introduced myself to his new “main girlfriend,” who was occupying the seat to his left.
“Hi, I’m Holly,” I said with a big smile, sticking out my hand. Remembering how people used to treat me, I made a conscious effort to
go out of my way to be kind.
“Hiiiii,” she said in a forced singsong voice, offering me a limp,
weak handshake.
Was that a sneer on her face or is the midday sun causing her to
squint? I wondered.
Immediately my gut told me that something was up with this girl,
but I tried to give her the benefit of the doubt. She was young and new
to all the commotion surrounding Hef. I chose to dismiss her shitty
first impression as poor social skills and not the snobbishness that it
felt like.



Hef’s photographer, Elayne, lined us all up for a photo. As the
former girlfriends, Bridget, Kendra, and I lined up next to the new
girls, but were directed by Hef and the photographers to stand next to
Hef instead. I felt bad that the new girlfriends were being shoved aside
for the “famous” ex-girlfriends. I’d been shoved aside so many times
myself in these situations and remembered how awful it felt. After the
photos were snapped, Hef and the Shannon twins said good-bye as
they were whisked away for press interviews. Crystal couldn’t even be
bothered to look in our direction.
“YOU GOT IT!” my manager gleefully shouted.
“What?” I squealed into my cell phone, hardly able to believe what
I was hearing.
Just a few days before my return for the Dancing with the Stars
season finale, I received word that I had landed the part of Bo Peep for
a three-month stint in Las Vegas. I was absolutely over the moon and
determined to work hard, promote my butt off, and with luck find a
way to become a more permanent part of the production.
The turnaround for production was quick and required me to get
out to Las Vegas immediately following the DWTS finale. As I busied
myself with packing the few things I had in my Santa Monica condo, I
got a call from the Shannon twins. They wanted to see if I would meet
them for lunch in Beverly Hills. Sure, the twins had a crazy reputation,
but I liked them. They had always been nice to me and I assumed they
wanted some advice on navigating the mansion—and Hef. Like I said
earlier, you don’t get a mansion operations manual when you move in,
so I was happy to help them any way I could.
“We want you to come back,” Kristina blurted out, not five
minutes after we sat down at Il Pastaio.



“Yeah, come back,” Karissa whined, their words almost overlapping. These two literally finished each other’s sentences.
“I can’t come back; I’ve already made a decision to move on,” I
said sympathetically, picking up a piece of bread out of the basket.
“Why, what’s wrong?”
I knew something must be askew for the twins to be asking my
help.
The girls went on to say that they thought Crystal was mean,
scowls appearing on their faces. Apparently, Hef’s newest girlfriend
wasn’t too good at making friends. They even went on to say she was
mean to Hef, though they didn’t give specific examples.
“Really?” I asked. In the past, I’ve witnessed some of Hef’s more
vocal girlfriends fight back or disobey, but never were they outwardly
mean to him (not to his face, anyway). I wasn’t sure what the twins
meant when they said she was “mean”; it was just clear that they didn’t
like living with her.
One of the twins chimed in that Hef was really sick and not doing
well before the other one took over, saying that he had fallen down in
his bathroom the other day and wet himself.
Kristina reiterated that Crystal wasn’t good for him, as if to imply
his declining health was somehow Crystal’s doing.
“Oh. That’s awful,” I said solemnly, bouncing my head back and
forth from Tweedledee to Tweedledum, trying to keep up with the
story. Friends inside the mansion had confided to me that Hef had become extremely frail and downtrodden. When the economy had
crashed and burned in late 2008, I knew that Playboy must have
taken a pretty severe hit. Hef already had financial pressures gnawing
at him prior to Wall Street crashing, so this couldn’t have helped
matters.



Kristina tried to explain things to me, saying that Crystal felt
really threatened by me and that any time she heard I had spoken to
Mary she “freaked out” because she thought I was going to come back.
Karissa cut in and said that when Hef had heard I was going to be at
his birthday party, he took extra time in front of the mirror getting
ready and that this had made Crystal jealous.
“Well, she doesn’t have to worry,” I said calmly and coolly. “I’m
definitely not coming back. In fact, I’m really trying my best to give
Hef space and—”
One of the blond beauties cut me off, telling me that Crystal took
the panel off my old desk with the birds and the initials.
Well, that was fast, I thought. Years ago, when I had convinced
Hef to let me have a desk installed in the vanity, I had a professional
woodworker from the mansion staff fashion a beautiful hand-carved
panel for the desk drawer etched with the likenesses of my favorite
mansion birds. In the center of the panel was a heart with my initials:
HM. Considering Hef’s monogram, HMH, littered everything at the
mansion (notepads, matchbooks, you name it) I figured he could always add an H at the end to make it his own initials on the off chance I
didn’t last.
I have to admit, I felt a little slighted. Pictures of Tina, Brande,
and Kimberley littered Hef’s room for years after I had moved in and
Crystal was already throwing fits about any sign of me just a few
months into dating Hef.
“It’s a little early in the relationship for her to be that picky,” I
said with a small smile. I didn’t want to give the twins any false hope
that I was going to come back and I wasn’t there to bad-mouth Crystal,
so I stopped talking and wrapped up the conversation.
After lunch I hugged the twins good-bye, wished them luck, and
let them know they could call me anytime. I didn’t know what to make



of what Karissa and Kristina had told me. I didn’t feel like they were
trying to sensationalize things; they just had their own way of communicating that didn’t always make sense to me and no filter when it
came to revealing others’ personal details. (While living at the mansion, the girls even told the Sun that Hef was losing his hearing due to
his use of Viagra.)
I have to say, I was a little curious about this Crystal character.
Though I kept far away from Hef and Crystal (in part to avoid replicating how Tina had made me feel after her departure), it still seemed
like Crystal had major jealousy issues. A few weeks earlier, I had run
into a Los Angeles magazine editor I knew socially who told me a story
about Hef begging him to retract a statement he had made about my
being welcome back in his life anytime.
The editor threw up his hands and said he told Hef he couldn’t recract it, that he had him on tape saying it and that he heard his new
girlfriend threw a fit about it when it came out.
When it came to being dramatic, it appeared Hef had met his
match.
AS PART OF MY contract with Peepshow, I was given a high-roller suite
at Planet Hollywood. Not only did I have a steady job, I also had a
reason to return to Las Vegas—a place that felt more like home in a
few short months than L.A. had felt in almost 10 years. With my Prius
brimming with most of my belongings, I said my tearful good-byes to
Mary and Captain Bob and headed straight for the desert.
Not long after arriving in town, I was finally able to meet up with
Criss’s bodyguard at the Luxor in order to grab my valuables that had
been sitting in his penthouse safe for the last two and a half months.
Criss had told me that mailing them wasn’t the best idea.



“I can’t wait to finally get my stuff back,” I sighed to Angel, who
had become my new best friend, as we drove down Las Vegas
Boulevard. “It’s like severing the last tie of that relationship. It feels
good to finally move on.”
“Amen!” exclaimed Angel as we drove into the Luxor’s North
Valet.
The bodyguard, whose expensive SUV had been idling as if he was
on his way somewhere, jumped out of his car after spotting me.
“You drive a Prius?” he sneered.
“Yeah . . .” I replied, caught off guard by his making fun of me.
He’d always been nice to me before, but was all of a sudden condescending and rude.
He let out a snarky laugh as he gave my car the once-over.
“Thanks for bringing this stuff down,” I said, eager to get out of
what was starting to feel like a really awkward situation.
“Yeah, no problem,” he said shortly, handing me a bulging manila
envelope. Without as much as a good-bye, he got back to his truck and
took off.
I jumped back into my car and ripped open the envelope, anxious
to see my things.
“What’s wrong?” Angel asked, seeing the upset look on my face.
Some of my jewelry was missing, specifically, the items he had
given me (the diamond-encrusted infinity necklace and the large
cross). Did he seriously take back those gifts? I thought. It’s not like I
intended to wear jewelry given to me by an ex-boyfriend, but I didn’t
think he’d actually take them back, either. It was as if he was telling
me I was never worth it to begin with. It was also a petty, cheap
move—after all, it wasn’t like I was asking for the Dalí back (although
perhaps I should have!). It wasn’t about the jewelry (although I did
wear the small necklace and ring he had given me to a few press



events, knowing I’d be photographed and what a big “Fuck You” that
would come across as). It was about him not having the decency to say
something to me about it. Once again, I felt like I had been thrown out
with the trash.
I decided to send him a text and give him the benefit of the doubt.
“Hey, the jewelry you gave me was missing from the packet I just
picked up,” I typed into my BlackBerry. I thought maybe he would
have a few words explaining why he wanted to keep those things, and
that would have made it all okay. But I never got a response.
I LOOKED AT MY new life in Las Vegas as an opportunity to reinvent myself. It had been an uphill battle, but I was finally where I wanted to be
as a single, successful career woman making something of my life. To
celebrate, I traded in my leased Prius and bought a convertible
Porsche with some of the money I had earned on Dancing with the
Stars. I wasted no time having it painted a custom sparkly pink. It
didn’t take long before I felt completely at home in my Planet Hollywood suite. I was even given an adjacent suite for my friend, Playmate
Laura Croft. Laura was eager to make the move to Vegas—and I
thought she would be a great character for the new reality series that I
was hoping to develop. She was very pretty and had a wild personality
that I hoped would translate on television.
Living at Planet Hollywood was absolutely surreal. It felt like all
the perks of the mansion had been rolled up into one luxurious package and dropped squarely at my feet. Besides the gorgeous suite and
24-hour butler service, my Peepshow contract covered all the room
service and restaurant food I could eat (including the casino Starbucks!) and limitless salon and spa services. The best part was: I never



felt lonely. At any given moment there was a 24-hour party right outside my door.
As the youngest headliner on the Strip, I took the city by storm. I
knew that promoting myself was the key to having a successful run
with Peepshow, so I attended every opening, every red carpet event,
and every pool party, and landed myself on the cover of all the Vegas
entertainment magazines before my debut. Despite the crumbling economy, it was a magical time in Las Vegas. Somehow it seemed that the
city was extra determined to carry on just as fabulously as it had
before.
When I wasn’t busy running around taking in all Sin City had to
offer, I was buried in Peepshow rehearsals. I couldn’t have been more
excited at the opportunity, but I was terrified that I wouldn’t be able
pull it off. Would people really pay to see me? I had only a few weeks
of rehearsal and managed to pick up the choreography pretty quickly
(thanks in large part to my time on DWTS), but all those insecurities
were still running rampant. Sure, I had done pictorials for Playboy,
but those photos were rigidly posed, heavily lit, and accessorized to
perfectly complement my body. For Peepshow, I would be performing
on stage for 90 minutes in front of a live audience wearing the tiniest
costumes. My body had taken such a beating during the exhaustive rehearsals and I had bruises everywhere—not to mention scars and what
remained of my Playboy Bunny tattoo.
“My boobs are going to look disgusting,” I told Nick, the choreographer. I imagined them bouncing all over the place during the highly
aerobic performance and it didn’t necessarily strike me as sexy. He assured me that it was all in my head.
This was my big break. If I could manage to fill seats and earn favorable reviews over those three months, maybe they would decide to



let me stay. I busted my ass day and night to make sure I gave this
show everything.
The tremendously talented cast was warm and welcoming. I’m
not sure they thought a reality TV star could add anything to their
show, but they saw how hard I was working and that I took the production very seriously. It wasn’t long before I joined their inner circle.
Most of the cast were Broadway singers and dancers brought in from
New York (Jerry wanted the best of everything!), so all these new
transplants bonded quickly. And like me, they were taking the city by
storm! After rehearsals, the cast would hang out at Striphouse, the restaurant next to our theater, and hit up clubs every couple of nights. I
grew especially close to the lead singer, Josh Strickland, who became
like a brother to me almost instantly. I don’t think there was ever a
group of people that had as much fun as we did. It was an amazing
time to be a part of that show. As I prepped for my debut, I’d watch
Kelly Monaco’s nightly performances. She’d offer me a friendly wave
from the rafters before taking her plunge down onto the stage each
night.
For so long I dreamed of becoming a performer, and this was my
chance to prove to everyone that I was capable of more than being a
“trophy girlfriend.”
It didn’t faze me that the audience was never packed (maybe it
should have). The show was averaging roughly 300 people a night,
which was pretty dismal considering the size of the theater and the expense of the production, but in early 2009, people weren’t flocking to
Vegas to see shows. If they happened to come to the city, they most
likely spent their time in the casinos hoping to earn back some of what
they lost in the recession.
Either way, it was clear that something needed to change to help
drive attendance, so right when I entered production, executives



began an entire overhaul on Peepshow’s marketing campaign. You
couldn’t turn a corner in Las Vegas without seeing me smiling on a
billboard, poster, or taxi. Suddenly the show had a face . . . and it was
mine! But whether or not that face would sell tickets remained to be
seen.
As (bad) luck would have it, when my opening night came around,
I hit some rough waters.
Earlier that day, I had decided to text Criss. In retrospect it was a
dumb move, but I was just so happy and in a place where personally I
wanted to forgive and forget. I’d heard from mutual acquaintances
that Criss was not pleased when I got the Peepshow gig and announced my return to Las Vegas. After all, it had been his agenda to
banish me from Vegas as if I had never existed. It must have chafed
him even more that my appearance on Dancing with the Stars ended
just as I had landed Peepshow. And, whether I liked it or not, Criss
was still a high-profile person in my new hometown, which could
prove to be very small at times. Why not make an attempt to bury the
hatchet? We’d almost certainly run into each other at some point.
“Hey, I just wanted to extend an invitation to my premier party
tonight,” I typed into my phone. “I wish you and your girlfriend the
best!”
I assumed I wouldn’t hear back from him, but wanted to extend
the olive branch, so I at least knew I did what I could to end things on
the best note possible.
A few hours later, I was backstage in my dressing room putting
the finishing touches on my hair and makeup. I was taking a few deep
breaths to calm my nerves when I heard my cell phone buzz. It was a
text message from Criss. Instinctively, I looked at the clock.



He must be going on late, I thought. It was a few minutes after his
second show should have started. I expected a generic “Good luck tonight” message. Instead, it went a little something like this:
“I told myself I wouldn’t do this, but I am answering your text
anyway. Criss is with me now. Stop texting him. You are disgusting.
You are in a burlesque show because you can’t do anything else. You
used an old man to get to the B-list. Criss told me the real reason you
guys broke up. It’s not because of scheduling differences, it was because you were on antidepressants and he couldn’t be with someone
like that. If I had your reputation, I would be on antidepressants, too.
You are the biggest running joke around here. You got used. Lose this
number.”
My face went white and I felt faint. I was completely beside myself. Apparently, his new girlfriend had taken his phone during his
performance. I sat still for what felt like 10 minutes reading and rereading the text. So many petty comebacks flashed through my mind. I
wanted to tell her that soon she would be the biggest running joke
(Criss routinely dumped his girlfriends whenever he had a famous
fling, and many of them would come crawling back the moment it
fizzled). I wanted to tell her no one would even want to look at her
face, let alone pay to see it. But mostly I wanted to tell her that Criss
lied to her about our breakup. I already knew he could be a piece of
shit, but I couldn’t believe he was sharing my private life with her!
During one of our late-night talks, I had confided to Criss that I had
taken antidepressants in the past. I was never ashamed of needing
help, but the fact that he would use that information against me really
pissed me off. It wasn’t right.
After taking a moment, I simply replied: “Criss lied to you. I
wasn’t even on antidepressants when we were together.” I didn’t need
to prove anything to her—and who knows if she would believe me



anyway—but I wanted to say my piece. Not to mention, I wanted to
take the opportunity to scroll through my BlackBerry and find one of
the many flirty texts Criss sent me six weeks earlier when I was on
DWTS (and after he had already moved her in). I selected a particularly salacious one, typed in my response to her rant, and hit Send.
“Oh my god, what happened?” Angel asked. She had come backstage to wish me luck and immediately registered the tears welling up
in my eyes.
I read the text out loud to her and explained what happened.
“Do not let this get to you,” she said, grabbing my shoulders and
looking me in the eye. “Do not let this ruin your night. And don’t think
for a second she doesn’t know what she’s doing. She knows this is your
big night. It’s all over town!”
“Thanks,” I said, sniffing back the tears, so grateful that Angel had
been there at that exact moment to say precisely what I needed to
hear. “You’re right.”
I took a deep breath, stood up from my chair, pulled my shoulders
back, and left my dressing room to face the press.
(Being the “small town” that the Vegas entertainment community
is, I eventually heard about the aftermath of my response to that mean
text. After reading it—and Criss’s earlier message—his girlfriend didn’t
let him escape unscathed. She apparently made an absolute scene in
his dressing room during intermission and left him, only to come
crawling back later, of course. I changed my number after that.)
Unfortunately, the night would not be without another hiccup as
the show encountered some technical difficulties. The lift that was
supposed to carry the male lead and me onto the stage for my big
number wasn’t working. As the stage went dark between scenes the
stagehands swept the props (and us!) off into the wings. Quickly, I
raced down the backstage stairs for my change (which included being



dried off and having my hair redone in roughly 60 seconds) before
making a far less dramatic entrance from the side of the stage. After
the show, the cast laughed off the glitch and encouraged me (still
rather distressed over it) to do the same. It was somehow freeing to
know that I could survive even the most inopportune malfunctions
and still manage to go on.
Despite the mean text message and the broken lift, my official debut in Peepshow couldn’t have been more perfect! After the performance, executives hosted a gala . . . for me! While fancy parties weren’t
anything new, I felt like the toast of the town drinking champagne and
hanging out with industry bigwigs who were all there to toast my debut. Josh and Angel helped me laugh off the mean text from Criss’s
girlfriend. And despite the lift debacle, my reviews were glowing and
advance ticket sales skyrocketed—making for some very happy producers. Planet Hollywood even blacked out the “Wood” on the hotel’s giant neon sign so it read “Planet Holly” for the night. Was I dreaming?
Or did this somehow really become my life?
RIGHT AROUND THE TIME of my arrival, Planet Hollywood announced
an upcoming auction of some of Marilyn Monroe’s personal belongings, which would be put on display throughout the casino. When I
was asked to model them for an upcoming magazine feature, I couldn’t
believe my luck.
Beyond honored, I modeled many of Marilyn’s personal items,
which I recognized from famous photos of the star: a white terry cloth
bathrobe, an orange Pucci top, a curve-hugging fuchsia day dress, etc.
I was fascinated with the quality of the pieces—things were constructed with so much more care back in Marilyn’s time! Even her causal
wear was of the highest quality.



A few items from Marilyn’s movies were in the collection, too.
Flushed with excitement, I tried on the original custom-tailored piece
intended for her “Diamonds Are a Girl’s Best Friend” number—a costume that was deemed too risqué and was eventually replaced in the
film by the iconic pink gown. Much has been said about Marilyn’s figure, and, like many women, her weight fluctuated over the years, but
this circa-1953 costume fit me like a glove. The flesh-toned leotard was
covered with a light fishnet, creating the illusion of being completely
nude under the netting. The piece was so well built, the boning carved
out my waist without feeling heavy or tight, like a typical corset. A
handful of rhinestones glittered across the bust, creating a sparkly,
“nude” look. It was hard to imagine that any other garment could
make me feel sexier.
There was one more piece that made a lasting impression on me.
After donning a strapless cream-colored cocktail dress and gorgeous
amber necklace from Marilyn’s personal collection, I was handed a kimono wrap to complete the look. There was no mistaking the frilly, violet and pink Edwardian-style confection. It was a piece Marilyn wore
in The Prince and the Showgirl—the same kimono wrap depicted in
my beloved Marilyn Monroe paper doll set all those years earlier.
Twirling around in front of the mirror like a little girl, I understood what Cinderella must have felt like when her Fairy Godmother
waved her magic wand and produced the most perfect ball gown. I was
in absolute awe—it was surreal to imagine that she had worn these
very same pieces, decades before me, and how, as a little girl, I shut
my eyes and dreamed about what it would feel like to be her for just a
moment.
And now I knew. Like me, Marilyn had suffered at the hands of
some not very nice men. She was used, unappreciated, and struggled
to find herself. She worked her way up in Hollywood with stars in her



eyes and a kind heart, but found that Hollywood wasn’t always as kind
in return. She may have been publically adored, idolized, and lusted
after, but she often felt alone and trapped. Those dark demons eventually got the best of Marilyn. Part of me knows that could have easily
been my fate had I not chosen to take care of myself. I only wish poor
Marilyn could have done the same.

CHAPTER 15

“If I had a world of my own, everything would be
nonsense.”
—Alice in Wonderland

D

espite what one might think, creating a world for myself and by
myself, independent of Playboy, wasn’t all that easy.
“Why don’t you go somewhere else—like Miami?” suggested
Brenda, one of my favorite E! executives. A few weeks after I had returned to Los Angeles, after my breakup with Criss, I took a lunch
meeting at the Four Seasons in Beverly Hills with a few people from E!
to discuss ideas for a possible Girls Next Door spin-off.
“I don’t want to go to Miami,” I explained. “There’s no reason to. I
don’t have anything to do in Florida. It just doesn’t feel organic.”
“What about . . .” Brenda began. She tapped her fork against her
plate, trying to drum up some additional non-Vegas ideas. “Chicago!”
she finally exclaimed. “You could try to take over Playboy!” she teased.
I smiled at her exuberance. As farfetched as it sounded, I knew
Brenda believed we could make a good show out of something so preposterous. She was one of my biggest champions for my photo editor
storyline on GND and really hoped to see season six follow the action



at Studio West. I needed to let her know that I was going to completely
sever ties with the magazine, before the conversation went any further.
“I really want to separate myself from Playboy and do my own
thing,” I said, before revealing to them my grand plan. “I’m going to go
to Las Vegas and do a live show.”
They all stared at me with blank expressions, trying with great
care to make sure their faces weren’t betraying them. When we sat
down for this lunch, I hadn’t yet landed Peepshow. But it wasn’t hard
to read their minds: Holly doesn’t have any stage talent—what was
she possibly going to do?
Okay, so it’s not like I had put my best foot forward for the meeting. Still in the midst of my Dancing with the Stars run, I didn’t have
time to shower before, let alone do laundry. I arrived at the swanky
Four Seasons hotel dressed in old jeans, Converse high-tops, and a
bulky Criss Angel logo emblazoned skull hoodie (not out of sentimentality, mind you; it’s what was clean).
“Well, we’ll see what happens,” Brenda offered, after what felt like
a 10-minute pause. “We just have a hard time with Vegas.”
I gave her a puzzled look.
“Every season we get a Vegas pilot,” she explained, her expression
turning more earnest. “I’m serious, every season—and it never works.”
E! had gambled on Vegas before and lost. I could tell the network
wasn’t quite ready to jump back in bed with Sin City, but I wasn’t willing to alter my vision. After spending most of my adult life playing by
someone else’s rules, I was finally determined to follow my heart.
Shortly after my lunch meeting with the E! execs, I announced my
three-month residency with Peepshow. Nonbelievers be damned!
When GND producers reached out to schedule a date for me to do a
cameo in the new season, I was hesitant. I knew they felt that if Bridget, Kendra, and I did these cameos, it would help loyal viewers make



the transition and warm up to the new girls. I eventually agreed to
have them bring Hef and his new girlfriends to see me in my new revue. I hated the idea of associating Playboy with Peepshow—and so
quickly into my tenure—but the free advertising for Peepshow was just
too good to pass up.
The transition into the new season wouldn’t be easy. To their
credit, the producers wanted to populate the cast of season six with
several Playmates in addition to the new girlfriends. They knew that
fans of the show wouldn’t necessarily warm up to three random girls
being plopped into our places and thought it would be nice to have a
few extra characters in the mix. Hef, however, insisted that Crystal,
Karissa, and Kristina be the focus of the series, as the new Girls Next
Door, despite objections that Hef’s relationship with the twins “reeked
of incest.”
Hef was still convinced that the show would remain popular no
matter whom he chose to date. In his mind, the girls’ personalities
didn’t matter and certainly didn’t contribute to the show’s success. It
was all about him, after all.
I didn’t catch much of season six—not out of spite, mind you.
With Peepshow’s six-nights-a-week schedule, I didn’t have time for
TV. However, I did make a point of watching the episode I ended up
appearing in and noticed that Crystal didn’t pass up any opportunities
to take a few unnecessary jabs at me.
“I like Bridget and Kendra, but Holly . . . I don’t know,” one of
Crystal’s friends whined in a high-pitched, whimpery voice.
Crystal giggled and said, “Every time I try talking to her, she’s
like, woo hoo, out to space.”
Keep in mind that at that point I had met Crystal only once (at
Hef’s Vegas birthday pool party). She made no attempt to actually
speak with me, beyond her snotty response to my introduction, but I



guess she thought making up lies was an okay thing to do on camera.
After all, she was the mansion’s head mistress and the star of GND
now, so surely no one would question her.
Producers asked if I would be available to shoot a scene with the
Shannon twins during the day and I agreed. Hef suggested the activity:
taking the girls to see his wax figure at Madame Tussaud’s at the
Venetian.
Crystal and Hef arrived later at the Palms in Las Vegas to meet
the twins, who were doing an autograph signing. Hef greeted them at
the table where the signing was set up while Crystal hung back behind
the velvet ropes. As the press cameras started flashing, Crystal bolted
around the barricade to participate in the hug fest.
“They kind of look like them,” Crystal sneered as she walked past
the hotel’s Playboy retail boutique and spied the Holly, Bridget, and
Kendra bobbleheads in the window.
Before Peepshow, I was asked to join Hef, Crystal, and the twins
in their suite for a family-style buffet dinner. Hef and I hadn’t spoken
much since our breakup, so seeing him for the first time on camera
was a bit uncomfortable. As he went in for an embrace, I clearly opted
for the ass-out “bro hug” and tried to avoid his kiss. When he offered
to feed each girlfriend a bite of his ice cream sundae, he turned to offer
me a spoonful, which I quickly refused, saying, “Oh, I ordered my
own.”
The Girls Next Door had planned on having us bring Hef up on
the stage for our audience participation bit in Peepshow, and the
crowd went wild. I played into it as much as I needed to, but was eager
to go on with the show.
“It seemed like that night, Hef was definitely the main attraction,”
Crystal quipped, in a voice overlay.



I knew what it felt like, as Hef’s girlfriend, to be compared to his
former flames and feel undervalued or underappreciated, but there
was no reason for Crystal to take that out on me with all her snide
remarks.
When producers summoned Bridget, Kendra, and me to reunite
for a GND episode featuring Kendra’s baby shower, we all agreed
without hesitation. Not only were we all grateful for the good things
that came from the show and from Hef; we were, at that point, still
very supportive of one another. While we had moved on to different
places in our lives, we still kept in touch and deep down, there was an
undeniable bond that we shared.
Mary O’Connor was gracious enough to host the bash in her backyard and Bridget did a wonderful job of putting the soiree together. It
was a perfect little gathering on a beautiful summer’s day—until Hef
and his girlfriends showed up.
The ordeal that ensued was reported by gossip blogger Perez
Hilton:
Sources tell PerezHilton.com exclusively that there was some
major drama at Kendra Wilkinson’s baby shower yesterday.
We reported earlier that not only were Kendra’s BFFs Holly
Madison and Bridget Marquardt in attendance but also Hef
and his newest girlfriends, Crystal Harris and the Shannon
twins.
Apparently, the twins and Crystal put up a major stink
about having to be at the party and refused to participate in
any of the games by hiding in the house.
According to our source, the girls were exceedingly rude to
everyone, especially Holly, Bridget, and Kendra, which just
made the whole day awkward.



And because the episode was being filmed for Girls Next
Door and not Kendra, Hef had to have his new ladies included in the footage, so he had them fake a scene “where it
looked like Kendra was opening her last present when she
hadn’t even started opening presents, just so they could
leave.” Once they were gone, we’re told the vibe mellowed out
and everyone had a wonderful time.
Uh-Oh. The new gals aren’t fans of the veterans, we see.
Perhaps there’s some jealousy that Hef America really likes
Holly, Bridget, and Kendra more than these three infants?
Occasionally, when I was on my computer, I’d have the TV on in
the background. Once I caught a commercial for the new season of The
Girls Next Door.
“I’m not the new Holly . . . she’s the old me,” Crystal snapped
sassily in the season’s first promotional trailer.
Ouch, I thought when I first heard it. Honestly, I didn’t even
blame Crystal for the snide remark. I’d been in that same interview
chair for five long seasons before she even came along and I assume
the producers fed her that line. Crystal just didn’t come off as comfortable or clever enough to think up even a lame zinger like that. In fact,
most of her dialogue on the show was painfully awkward at best.
I was terribly disappointed in the producers. For four years, I had
(literally!) bared my life for that show, but as soon as I left, they were
taking potshots at me. There is no doubt in my mind that, had the new
cast succeeded and the show remained on the air, they would still be
bagging on me to this day if it was good for ratings.
From the reports I read and the little I did see, season six felt like
a stale rehash of old storylines mixed with some of the ideas we had
tossed around but had not gotten around to using over the years (like



“camping in the backyard”). And when promos began airing, I couldn’t
help but see my name popping up on websites and blogs because of
some hurtful jab being made at my expense. It felt like they were trying to encourage a war between the old and new guard. Or perhaps
they felt that by throwing our names around as often as possible they
could distract viewers and keep them from realizing what a snore-fest
the once energetic and bubbly series had become.
When asked in an interview what I thought of the new season, I
was honest. Maybe I should have just said that I hadn’t seen any of it,
but the constant jabs had begun gnawing at me—after all, I’m only
human.
“The girls need to focus on what makes them unique and not doing the same things Bridget, Kendra, and I have already done on the
show,” I said candidly. “I don’t want to look behind, I want to look
forward.”
A week letter I received a letter from Hef reprimanding me for my
remarks. Hef loved to send letters. Prior to sending one, he’d usually
make a copy and place it neatly in one of his countless scrapbooks. I
don’t think he writes the letters with the purpose of getting a response
or closure (which is why I never bothered to respond), I think he does
it so he can have the last word in even the tiniest event in the story of
his life. It’s Hef’s version of reality, all the time.
When I filmed a guest spot on Kendra’s self-titled spin-off, my
former housemate confessed to me (off camera) that she got disapproving letters from Hef fairly regularly as well. She told me she was
forced to apologize for a quote she gave the media referring to the
“whores up there” at the mansion, which Hef assumed referred to the
Shannon twins.
I would end up receiving many “reprimand” letters from Hef—it
seemed nothing I said in the press met his approval. The whole thing



felt sort of creepy—as if he thought he was my dad or something and
had some sort of jurisdiction over me. Eventually, when I would see
letters from the mansion in my mail, I would throw them away
without even opening them. They just creeped me out and brought
forth negative feelings. I didn’t want him to have that sort of power
over me.
Meanwhile, I was taking Las Vegas by storm. Peepshow had
quickly become the Vegas Strip’s new smash hit. Ticket sales skyrocketed, prompting producers to sign me on through the end of the year! I
couldn’t believe it! I knew how hard I had worked trying to make the
show and my performance as successful as possible—and it actually
paid off!
Speaking of paying off, I was finally doing well financially. Actually . . . very well. I signed a multimillion-dollar contract with Peepshow (and even my breasts were insured with Lloyd’s of London for a
million dollars—not bad for a $7,000 investment!). People assumed I
had been rich beyond my wildest dreams at the mansion and that I
must be struggling to get by in my post-Playboy life . . . but, in reality,
that couldn’t have been further from the truth.
I was carving out a pretty unique niche for myself, and the quirkiness of my new showgirl life was becoming hard to ignore. I had been
called “one of the most in-demand and beloved celebrities in Las Vegas” by the Los Angeles Times. Performing full time in a live show
made me different from all the other talent on E! Most reality-show
starlets on TV at that time were L.A. girls with a passion for fashion, so
being a new kind of Vegas showgirl at least set me apart from all the
others. In the summer of 2009, I began seriously discussing a spin-off
with E! I was determined to make Vegas work. Luckily, Brenda gave
the idea another chance and we started exploring themes for a potential series.



Season six of The Girls Next Door was a total disaster. After viewers saw what they were getting on the season premiere, most never
tuned back in. The new girlfriends pulled only about half the ratings
we did in previous seasons. When the new season ended in August, E!
pulled the plug on what had been, less than a year earlier, their number one series. In an effort to recapture some of the GND loyalists—who were tuning in by droves to Kendra—the network green-lit
production for a pilot that would serve as an “E! special” that December called Holly’s World.
My initial vision for the show was Legally Blonde meets a PGrated version of Showgirls. Peepshow wasn’t enough for me. I wanted
my day job to be interning at the mayor’s office, learning how to run
the city. My pilot centered on a silly plot: me visiting the mayor’s office
with a complaint about roadwork, resulting in my friends and me going on several misadventures trying to collect signatures for a petition.
It was a roundabout way of introducing the people in my life, what I
wanted to do, and taking a tour of some unlikely spots and meeting
some strange people in the city.
I didn’t necessarily assume that my pilot would rate that well. I
wasn’t an energetic, ditsy, made-for-reality-TV blonde like Kendra. I
was quiet and reserved and much preferred reading a book to shaking
my ass. While I knew my lifestyle was unique, would anyone really
care? When I received word that the special had not only done well,
but that E! wanted to order an entire season, my jaw hit the floor! Of
course that was what I had hoped for, but I certainly hadn’t expected
it!
It was official: Holly’s World was a go. In my head, I thought it
was going to be my version of The Mary Tyler Moore Show—girl
moves to a new city post breakup in order to make it on her own. With
shooting to begin in early 2010, our first order of business was to lock



down the cast. The three friends I had chosen to appear in my pilot
were asked back for the full season: Angel Porrino (my bestie and new
assistant), Josh Strickland (my charismatic Peepshow costar), and
Laura Croft (my crazy roommate) rounded out the crew.
Anxious to begin this Playboy-free chapter of my life, I was eager
to sort out contract negotiations as quickly as possible and begin filming. However, like a bad dream, my past continued to haunt me and
the contracts we had to sign while at the mansion carried over onto my
new spin-off with E!. It was a lot of baggage to move forward with, but
I was in a hurry to get going. And, conditioned by all those years at the
mansion, I still wasn’t strong enough to hold my ground for long. I had
grown a lot in the last year and a half, but I still had a long way to go.
At the start of 2010, cameras began following our wild lives in Sin
City as sexy singles looking to balance our wild Vegas social calendars
with performances six nights a week—and like all reality shows, it
wasn’t without its fair share of drama.
I was pressured heavily by production to put my dating life on
camera and I stubbornly refused. I agreed to film a “blind date” episode, but anyone I dated in real life was strictly off-limits at this point. I
was sick of being thought of as “Hugh Hefner’s ex,” and the way I felt
like Criss used me for publicity had left a bad taste in my mouth, so I
was determined to stand on my own and not publicize my love life. If I
was even asked about a rumored romance on camera, I denied it. This
resulted in more than one argument between production and me, but I
refused to give in.
Over the course of the first season, I bought a house and Angel
and her new son Roman moved in. We traveled to Mexico to shoot a
calendar and went on a road trip with Bridget, and Kendra paid a visit
for a baseball episode. The show followed Angel as she got breast implants and Josh as he went to New York to audition for a new



Broadway show. Overall, it was a fun, heartwarming season and the
three of us had a blast. Viewers connected with Josh and Angel—they
loved Angel’s and my chemistry and Josh’s endless energy. Laura was
the weakest link of the cast—she was crazy and funny in real life, but
on TV she was ordinary. In my time I’ve seen boring, snotty people
come off as the life of the party on television, too, which just goes to
show that “reality” TV isn’t really reality.
Before the show’s June 2010 debut, the cast and I were swept into
a photo studio to shoot promotional photos for the series. Each sequence was more fun than the last: the cast strutting down a yellowbrick-road version of the Las Vegas Strip; me being shot from above,
twirling in a pink dress atop a large cartoon graphic of the city; and me
perched on a larger-than-life disco ball rising from the city’s skyline.
E! was rolling out the red carpet . . . for me! It felt like a dream come
true.
Shortly before the show aired, E! flew me to Los Angeles to shoot
video promos for the network. All the network stars were required to
shoot: Ryan Seacrest and Giuliana Rancic, the Kardashian sisters,
Kendra and Hank, and me.
“Everyone’s really excited about your show, they’re all talking
about it,” the makeup artist said, putting the finishing touches on my
Marilyn-inspired look. “You are the only one who is getting to be in a
shot by yourself. You’re so lucky.”
She was right. Everyone else was being shot with their costars or
coanchors—and I would be the only E! personality featured solo, wearing a black version of the Marilyn Monroe Seven Year Itch windblown
gown and elegant opera-length gloves.
“Oh my God! It’s like, so nice to meet you,” squealed a young,
skinny brunette as she swept into my dressing room, seemingly taking



stock of the hair, makeup, and wardrobe paraphernalia thrown
everywhere.
“We loved Girls Next Door,” her buxom companion gushed.
“Totally,” the skinnier one jumped in. “Like, when I first got an
agent, I told him I want to be on the Girls Next Door,” she babbled,
her head bobbing from side to side as she spoke, “and then he was like,
‘No, you need your own reality show!’ ”
“Oh, thanks! That’s sweet!” I responded as an E! executive motioned to me from the doorway, ready to whisk me off to set. “Nice to
meet you! I’m sure I will see you around!”
Certain we were a safe distance from my dressing room, I turned
to him and whispered: “Who were those girls?”
“Oh, they’re the Arlington sisters,” he stated matter-of-factly as if
I should have heard of them.
When I gave him a blank look, he continued.
“Did you hear about those robberies in the Hollywood Hills?” he
asked, his voice taking on a very Hollywood sales-pitch tone. “All the
celebrity houses, like Paris Hilton’s? They are the ones that did those.”
He said that as if that were a perfectly reasonable claim to fame.
Needless to say, some of the network talent wasn’t necessarily
thrilled to be sharing the spotlight with these young felons. Say what
you will about how some of us became household names, none of us
got there by breaking and entering. The world of “famous for being
famous” was getting weirder and weirder.
HOLLY’S WORLD PREMIERED TO excellent ratings—nearly 2 million
viewers!—and talk of a second season was practically immediate.
Between filming the series, watching it unfold on air, and performing
six nights a week, 2010 went by in a blur. My turn in Peepshow had



garnered such fabulous reviews over my first 18 months that I moved
from the three-month contracts the show had offered me initially to
signing a full-year commitment and had even begun singing lessons so
that I could take on an additional role in the production. On top of all
that, I had a new gig as the Las Vegas correspondent for the entertainment news show Extra. I had little spare time, but was still managing
to have a blast!
I was finally standing on my own. Ratings were so strong for
Holly’s World, they were even surpassing those of Kendra’s latest season. In fact, there was only one attempt to include a Playboy-related
plotline in that first season. When producers suggested the cast and I
stop by Hef’s annual birthday party at the Palms, I wasn’t particularly
opposed to it. While I wasn’t jumping out of my chair to go spend time
with Hef and Crystal (particularly after I watched her spiteful GND
character unfold), I knew that fans loved those sort of on-camera
reunions.
The Holly’s World cast arrived at the Hef suite at the Palms for
the ’80s-themed soiree (which I assumed was a not-so-subtle wink to
Hef’s age) in costume. Hef seemed genuinely delighted to see us, as
did Mary and a few of the girls I had known from my mansion days.
Crystal, however, barely made her presence known. New playmate
Claire Sinclair (a Barbi Benton look-alike) acted as a go-between for a
pouting Crystal, who spent much of the party tucked upstairs and
away from cameras, despite being swathed in a stunning Baracci gown
and dolled up to the nines. Hef’s new number one girl seemed to resent having anything to do with my show—especially since “her show,”
GND season six, had been canceled.
The Shannon twins had since departed the mansion. According to
the rumor mill, Karissa and Kristina were wild and never really good
at adhering to the rules. I can’t imagine Crystal was disappointed to



see the magnetic twosome go. In their place was a new girlfriend, a
gorgeous, baby-faced blonde named Anna Sophia Berglund.
Hef’s birthday party eventually moved to Moon Nightclub. When
Josh and I arrived back at the Palms—after doing two performances of
Peepshow—we entered the club and situated ourselves in our designated booth, just a row over from Hef’s table. Immediately, he spotted
us and, with a big smile on his face, waved to us with both arms and
the enthusiasm of a little kid.
“It’s like he’s signaling for help,” Josh observed. “He looks bored.”
He did look a little bored and eager for the cameras to make their
way over. Crystal was supposed to have sung “Happy Birthday” for Hef
at midnight (something Bridget had done at his party the previous
year), but she didn’t end up performing. Knowing Hef, he clearly was
waiting for his on-camera moment.
After downing a round of drinks, we made our way over to his
booth.
Suddenly, one of Hef’s security stopped us.
“Sorry,” the hulking guard said. “The boss wants to leave.”
We couldn’t have been there for more than 15 minutes. What was
this guy talking about? I thought.
And just then bright security flashlights whizzed past us, leading
Hef’s entourage out of the club. Two Playmates—Jen and Kim—walked
by us, looking truly embarrassed, and mouthed “sorry.” Next came an
angry-looking Crystal, who avoided any eye contact with us, dragging
a dazed and confused-looking Hef, who shuffled along behind her.
“What happened?” I asked the guard.
“I don’t know,” he shrugged. “I just got the word they were
leaving.”
It was so unlike Hef to miss even a short chance to be in front of
cameras that I was actually concerned. He lived for that sort of



attention. He didn’t look unwell, but I asked the Playboy publicists
about it anyway. They assured me that Hef was perfectly fine and his
sudden departure had nothing to do with his health.
It didn’t take a rocket scientist to put the pieces together: Crystal’s
neurotic behavior and canceled performance combined with being
forced to participate in my reality show and Hef’s overzealousness to
see us . . . You do the math.
Oh well, I thought. Hef loved any chance to be on TV and he loved
Girls Next Door nostalgia. To me, though, it didn’t matter whether we
got the nightclub scene or not. If he didn’t want to film it, it was his
loss. Unlike Hef, I didn’t enjoy living in the past. I was young and living for the present and future.
I couldn’t help but think of Hef spending the better part of five
seasons pounding into Bridget’s, Kendra’s, and my heads that we were
replaceable—that the show would be just as successful in our absence.
With Kendra and Holly’s World pulling in solid ratings and being renewed for additional seasons and GND fading quietly into the night, it
appeared we weren’t so “replaceable” after all.

CHAPTER 16

“I do hope it’s my dream and not the Red King’s! I
don’t like belonging to another person’s dream!”
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

E

ven the most magical fairy tale isn’t complete without a villain—and one was about to arrive in Holly’s World.
E! was thrilled with the performance of the first season of Holly’s
World and promptly ordered a second season. To satiate the viewer
demand, the network scheduled production to begin in fall 2010 in order to meet a January 2011 premiere date (in the television industry,
fall and winter premieres are reserved for the more established shows,
while summer premieres tend to be for untested programming). The
shift forward was a huge move for our little-reality-show-that-could!
Unfortunately, not every E! show saw such great success. Earlier
that year, Hef had delivered a pilot to E! titled The Bunny House that
he hoped would be the second coming of The Girls Next Door and
keep Playboy—and himself—on air.
The show followed the exploits of five Playboy Playmates as they
lived in a plush pad across the street from the mansion: Claire Sinclair,



Hope Dworaczyk, Crystal McCahill, Jaime Edmondson, and Jayde
Nicole.
Claire (the Barbi Benton doppelgänger) and I had become friends.
Not only was she beautiful and sweet, she actually had a brain in her
head. I had met Hope and Crystal during the Anniversary Playmate
search a few years earlier, while Jaime was new to the mansion fold.
She had an interesting history: she’d been everything from an NFL
cheerleader to a police officer to a contestant on CBS’s The Amazing
Race.
Then there was 2008’s Playmate of the Year and the show’s official mean girl, Jayde. The ex-girlfriend of reality star Brody Jenner,
she had already spent some time in front of cameras during the final
season of MTV’s The Hills.
In the wake of her breakup, Jayde had been trying to shop around
her own pilot with no luck, but the network loved the idea of a “girl
you love to hate” character, so when producers got wind of that, they
placed her in The Bunny House as the resident shit stirrer.
The pilot followed a re-creation of Claire’s Playmate test shoot at
Studio West—with Crystal seated purposefully in my former perch
viewing the instantly uploaded images on a computer monitor and
shouting words of encouragement, as I used to do when I directed the
shoots—and a group trip to Las Vegas for Hope’s Playmate of the Year
celebration. But between Kendra and Holly’s World, there was just too
much Playboy-produced content on E! and the pilot wasn’t picked up
to series.
However, there were those who remained obsessed with the idea
of resurrecting Girls Next Door, so Claire and Jayde were planted on
Holly’s World in hopes that their characters would gain enough popularity among viewers that E! would be forced to revisit The Bunny
House concept.



I had virtually no choice in the matter, but I wasn’t particularly
bothered by it at first. Producers insisted that, per E!, the show needed
more drama and Jayde had signed on to the show, knowing she was
going to play the “bad girl.” Honestly, that made my job much easier; I
was happy to let her be the drama queen. Unlike Girls Next Door
(where “negativity” was forbidden), most reality shows require some
dramatic elements . . . how can you have an interesting story without
conflict? Oftentimes, producers will guide the storylines, encourage
talent to make provocative statements, and edit things together to increase the overall tension on the series. If producers had a predetermined villain, then we wouldn’t need to manufacture trouble between
the existing cast—who at the time were my closest friends. Plus, I
didn’t feel threatened. I was sure E! would never order The Bunny
House.
As for Claire, she was a natural fit for Holly’s World, not because
of her Playboy connection, but because she was a budding Vegas
showgirl herself who had just signed on for a guest run at MGM’s
Crazy Horse Paris revue.
While we took a break from filming during the holidays, Hef and
Crystal had become engaged. Right on cue, the media firestorm began
citing that I was reportedly “devastated” upon hearing the news. Actually, I was probably one of the few people in the world not at all surprised that Hef was getting remarried. Hef’s youngest son, Cooper,
turned 18 that year, providing Hef the green light he felt he needed to
divorce Kimberley (despite the fact they had already been separated
for nearly 13 years), plus with Girls Next Door no longer on the air,
Hef needed an incentive to once again reinvent himself and garner
headlines.
I understand why people thought I would be upset. For five seasons it appeared as though I wanted nothing more than Hef to myself,



a big white wedding, and the mansion hallways echoing with pitterpatter of tiny feet. In the media, our breakup played out as if I was unable to tame the ultimate bachelor only to have him propose to the
next blonde that shoved her way into the mansion. The truth was: I
couldn’t have cared less. The happier Hef was without me, the more
quickly I could disassociate myself. It could have easily been me walking down that aisle and I was grateful to have gotten the hell out of
there!
Long after I left, a friend of Hef’s confided to me that Hef kept
saying that he had “no idea” why I chose to leave.
“All you had to do was stick around until Cooper turned 18,” he
said with a pointed look.
“But I don’t care anymore! That’s not what I want,” I responded.
So few people seemed to realize that I had woken up from the spell I
had been under a long time ago.
The few years I had been out of the mansion had been the best of
my life so far—if I had married Hef, I wouldn’t have had any of that.
My life would have been over.
“DON’T YOU MISS THE maaaaaaansion?” a dreamy-eyed girl asked me
during one of my Peepshow meet-and-greets. I would often get this
question and it continued to amaze me how many women were cast
under this Playboy spell. There I was headlining on the Vegas Strip,
making millions of dollars a year all on my own and starring in my
own television show . . . and they wondered if I missed living by an archaic set of rules with a spoiled man old enough to be my grandfather.
Were they crazy?!



After hearing this over and over again, I began to realize that what
viewers took away from The Girls Next Door was nothing like what life
there was really like.
When it was suggested we film an episode of Holly’s World at the
mansion so I could congratulate Hef on his engagement, I actually
jumped at the chance! This was my opportunity to show viewers that I
wasn’t at all “devastated” by Hef’s engagement; in fact, I was happy
that he was moving on and wished him well! Regardless of how I felt
about Crystal, I never for a moment wanted to trade places with her. I
thought it was important for people to know that.
It was an eerily quiet day at the mansion when I arrived to film
my “congratulations” scene with Hef. An extra-large dollhouse occupied the great hall—a gift I had commissioned for Hef shortly before I
left. The piece was an exact replica of the home he had grown up in in
Chicago in the early part of the last century.
When Hef arrived to shoot the scene, he spent a lot of time fussing over the dollhouse. Eventually, Crystal made her way downstairs
in a cozy-looking long-sleeved shirt. I congratulated her as well. She
seemed different to me that day: calm and friendly, low-key, as if there
wasn’t a negative bone in her body.
Maybe she’s finally growing into herself, I thought. It was nice to
see that side of Crystal. Perhaps I had judged her too harshly. Maybe
they’ll actually be good for each other, after all.
I returned to Vegas that night and went back to finishing season
two of Holly’s World. The second season was even more memorable
than the first. The producers found a couple of private investigators to
track down Josh’s birth mother (whom he had never met and knew
nothing about). When Josh and Angel went to Charleston, Josh’s hometown, everyone thought we were at the start of a long quest to find
his real mother. No one actually expected her to turn up right away!



The investigators came through and the episode turned out to be one
of the most genuinely surprising and emotional ones of the series.
I let Angel go as my assistant and gave her the role of my understudy in Peepshow. She also landed a small role in another Strip production due to an audition that was planned and filmed for the show.
Laura was mostly prompted by producers to hang out with Jayde so
that our resident villain had an excuse to be intertwined into our
storylines.
Though the show was better than ever, I found myself growing
more and more distant from my closest friends. With my crazy work
schedule, Josh was really the only person from the show that I regularly saw off camera—and that was only because we were in Peepshow
together. It was clear that if there was a season three, Laura wasn’t necessarily going to get invited back due to her failure to connect with
the audience. I wondered if she would choose to stay in Vegas if that
were the case.
Meanwhile, Angel, who was loved on the show, was growing more
and more distant from me. I rarely saw her anymore and she seemed
to make a point of hanging out with anyone but me, Josh, or Laura.
She spent most of her time at her mom’s home, leaving her and Roman’s things in each of their rooms at my house. I began to sense
something was wrong. Her attitude changed, too. She’d come a long
way professionally since joining the Holly’s World cast and I thought I
had helped her get so many things that she wanted, but maybe those
were just things I would have wanted at her age. Obviously something
was a bad fit, because she didn’t seem happy anymore. The carefree,
fun-loving Angel who used to light up my days was gone.
While my cast was handling their newfound places in the spotlight in different ways, I kept busy with work and foolishly pushed my
concern about my friends aside. We’ll deal with that when next



season’s negotiations come up, I thought. The future seemed so bright
that I was sure everything would just repair itself eventually.
Claire was the front-runner for 2011’s Playmate of the Year and it
was suggested that since she and I had become so close, I resurrect my
role as Playboy’s photo editor for the pictorial as a special contributor.
Despite how desperate I was to get away from Playboy, I actually liked
this idea since it put the spotlight on my professional, not personal, involvement with the magazine.
Given her very era-specific look and curves, I began planning the
shoot in my head: a vintage Bettie Page–inspired feature using the
plush red Crazy Horse theater as a backdrop. We couldn’t wait to get
started!
As the shoot dates drew nearer, I was excitedly explaining the
project to Josh when I got a call from one of the producers. With a
heavy sigh, he dropped the bomb on me that we were no longer filming Claire’s pictorial.
“Why?” I asked, hoping it was just a silly mix-up that could easily
be fixed.
I heard him take a deep breath and exhale. He explained that Hef
had just called him and said that Crystal and I had a Twitter fight and
that she was really upset about it. He said she threw a fit about it and
that Hef had no choice but to take me off the pictorial.
“Ugh,” I groaned. I had heard through the grapevine that Crystal
was still moping around the mansion because she had “her show taken
away” and was upset that I was the one still on television. Any suggestion of my presence anywhere near Playboy sent Crystal into a frenzy.
What happened to the laid-back Crystal I had seen the last time I visited the mansion?
“Are you serious? We didn’t get into a fight,” I snapped, exasperated by her immaturity. “Someone on Twitter pointed out that she



copied my underwater photo shoot, and later I made a generic post
about hating copycats. That’s it. I didn’t even mention her name or
reply to the person who pointed it out!
“I’m sorry that she has a guilty conscience,” I huffed, rolling my
eyes. Over the past few years, I definitely began to feel that for
whatever reason Crystal was trying to Single White Female me. “And
I’m sorry that she can’t deal with people’s comments on the Internet.”
Crystal had no clue what to do besides follow in my footsteps.
Maybe she felt like emulating me was the only safe thing for her to do.
In a way, I could empathize with her, since I knew how frightening Hef
could be and how scary it could feel to try and step out of the realm of
what he expected of you. I had been smacked down pretty hard for
cutting my hair and wearing red lipstick and had been afraid to dress
any differently than his previous girlfriends, after all. In my “off time”
during the day, I had held on to being my own person in some ways, so
when Crystal even started copying my private life, I was a little
creeped out. She became an overnight Disney fanatic, made a point of
tracking down and befriending my old buddy Britney (who had long
ago ceased being a mansion regular), and started spending her days
with her.
Crystal acquired the seemingly requisite boob and nose job
shortly after moving into the mansion, and after her plastic makeover,
Hef handed her a December 2010 centerfold. This was a stark contrast
to how the centerfolds had been held far, far away from me and most
of the girls I had cohabitated with, but I suppose Hef felt that giving
Crystal a centerfold to shoot on GND was safer than giving her a
“celebrity pictorial” like he had given me, Bridget, and Kendra. Or perhaps he was finally playing fair for a change and putting her on the
same level as the twins; who knows?



The first photo in her spread looked a lot like the opener from my
final self-directed pictorial for February 2009 (standing back to camera naked in between two theater doors). The rest of the pictorial was
very old Hollywood, complete with the same style of monogrammed
pillows I had requested for a GND calendar shoot two years earlier.
Sure, the fact that it was December (my birthday month and favorite
time of year) could have been purely coincidental, but I knew how
painstakingly produced every last detail of these shoots were . . . including the hat that sat next to Crystal in her centerfold: a fedora adorned with a single sprig of holly. Even her Playmate video had been
filmed at my favorite location, the spot I fought so hard to secure for
my final pictorial: the Los Angeles Theatre. Knowing how expensive it
was to shoot video there, they must have spared no expense to get it
done. It was weird.
Clearly I wasn’t the only one recognizing these “coincidences.” I
constantly saw fans on Twitter tagging Crystal and me, saying that
Crystal was copying me. Crystal must have seen them, too.
I was disgusted with both Crystal and Hef. He knew how much I
enjoyed producing these pictorials and he took the project away from
me as a form of punishment.
The producer sighed and said he was really looking foward to covering this shoot. I knew he was telling the truth. The crew and I had
known each other for years and we all seemed to especially enjoy doing the photo shoot episodes.
“Me, too,” I conceded.
He suggested, with a momentary flicker of hope in his voice, that
all I would have to do is call and apologize to Hef and Crystal.
“No way!” I exclaimed. “Why should I have to apologize when I
didn’t do anything wrong? That’s idiotic. If he wanted me to direct the



pictorial and have it featured on the show, that decision should be separate from any drama Crystal and he are having. Forget it!”
Knowing Hef as I do, I’m sure part of him got off on the fact that
Crystal was jealous and insecure. If I were to engage in this one-sided
battle, I’d only give him the satisfaction of feeling fought over. No,
thank you.
I can just see his scrapbook entry now: “Hef cancels Holly’s shoot
with Claire due to a fight Crystal and Holly had over Hef.” (He always
referred to himself in third person in the scrapbook captions. The
whole thing is so bizarre.)
In your dreams, pal.
AS SEASON TWO OF Holly’s World wrapped, Lifetime TV was preparing
a special on Hef and Crystal’s upcoming June wedding, but it wasn’t to
go on as planned. Crystal ended up running out on Hef five days before the 300-guest ceremony was set to take place. The crew was left
with nothing to film. I couldn’t begin to imagine how mortified Hef
must have felt. Hef’s friends and many Playmates were in an uproar,
denouncing Crystal, sometimes publicly on social media. Kendra and I
were asked to film a scene with Hef to help fill time in the special,
which was now titled Hef’s Runaway Bride. I did it as a favor to production, the same people behind Girls Next Door and Holly’s World,
not Hef, though I do have to admit, despite all the negative things I
had been through with the guy, I did feel bad for him after such a public humiliation. I wasn’t interested in showing up to say “I told you so”
regarding Crystal, I just wanted to try and be a friend.
I flew into L.A. the day of the shoot and arrived at the mansion
early to wait for the production crew in the unusually silent great hall.
Suddenly, a bleary-eyed blonde wearing a pair of Hef’s oversize aqua



silk pajamas and a noticeable case of bed head appeared at the top of
the staircase.
“Excuse me,” asked Shera Bechard, a recent Playmate who had
obviously just wandered out of Hef’s bedroom, “how do I take the dog
out?” She pointed down at a King Charles spaniel, the dog Crystal had
left behind, who was sitting at her feet.
“Um, you just open up the door and take him outside,” I said, trying my best not to sound condescending. It was a strange question
with an obvious answer, but then again, the mansion was such a
bizarre place it would have been easy to assume that there was probably a weird ritual involved with taking one of the mansion’s dogs outside. Thankfully the crew showed up and ushered me down to Mary’s
office, saving me from that awkward exchange with Hef’s latest
concubine.
As Kendra and I sat in her mansion office, Mary explained that
she had received a call from Crystal when Crystal was at the Jazz
Festival. Crystal confided in her that she was really nervous. Mary said
she had asked her if the problem was Anna (Anna was one of the two
girls Hef was supposedly dating when he was “settling down” with
Crystal), and Crystal had said no, that she loved Anna. Mary just
shrugged and said she didn’t know what happened between Crystal
and Hef.
By then, we had all heard the gossip that Hef and Crystal couldn’t
come to terms on a prenup, leaving them at a stalemate just days before the wedding. So Crystal decided to up and leave—straight into the
arms of her secret boyfriend, Jordan McGraw (the son of Dr. Phil . . .
what would he have to say about this little love triangle?). One
celebrity news site even revealed that she had moved in with him.
It was the giant elephant in the room, but neither Kendra nor I
breathed a word of it. After all, we had a film crew surrounding us and



we all implicitly knew that that topic was not something Hef would allow to be included in the special.
Kendra and I sat down with Hef in the mansion library, a room I
had been in a zillion times before, but I had never been this uncomfortable. Despite the years that had passed, there we were—Bridget,
Kendra, and me—hanging on the wall. It was a photo from our first
pictorial, the three of us piled naked on top of one another. Living at
the mansion you start to get desensitized to those sorts of things. Nude
photos, no matter how explicit, had all started to look the same to me.
But after being away from Playboy for three years, the photo that had
once seemed so silly and playful struck me for the first time as incredibly pornographic (which of course was the original intention behind
the image in the first place). Who knows, I may have been the one that
initially had the thing framed, but by that point I was embarrassed
that that photo was still up there for all to see.
Hef confessed, while looking directly at me, that he proposed to
Crystal to avoid making the same mistake he had with me. I remained
as stoic as possible, just nodding solemnly like a robot. Giving him—or
viewers—false hope was the last thing I wanted to do. We each gave
him a hug, offered him our condolences and words of encouragement,
and then let him get back to his paperwork.
The Lifetime special flopped. No one was invested in Crystal and
Hef as a couple, and unlike the ferocious media storm, the special
failed to mention the other man Crystal was involved with. Though the
scandal made a splash in the press, most people who didn’t know Hef
brushed it off as a publicity stunt.
Trust me, Hef may be a publicity whore, but he would never risk
his own bulletproof ladies’ man reputation for the sake of a headline.



Crystal, on the other hand, didn’t have as much reverence for his
public image. According to a report in the New York Post’s gossip
column Page Six:
Hugh Hefner’s wedding to Crystal Harris was called off after
she secretly planned to ditch the Playboy mogul at the altar in
return for a $500,000 media deal, Page Six has exclusively
learned. . . . A source told us, “Crystal wanted to ditch Hef at
the altar. Her plan was to walk up the aisle and say she
couldn’t go through with it. The wedding was to be filmed for
a reality special, and her refusal to marry him would be a sensation. She was looking for a tie-in deal of around $500,000
for the exclusive ‘I ditched Hef at the altar’ interview. While
there was interest, Crystal didn’t get an offer anywhere near
half a million.”
Crystal continued to milk any ounce of publicity she could get for
months: promoting her Playboy cover (the July 2011 cover had been
designed to showcase Hef’s newest wife, but at the last minute a sticker reading “Runaway Bride” had to be slapped over the top of it so the
magazine wouldn’t look dreadfully out of step and could simultaneously capitalize on the scandal) and Girls Next Door season six’s DVD
release (despite barely being in any of the episodes, Bridget, Kendra,
and I were on the front of the box along with Crystal and the twins in
an attempt to sell more copies). She appeared at a Heidi Montag–hosted pool party, publically pawned her engagement ring, hired an animal lawyer to get back the dog she left at the mansion months earlier,
and made a well-publicized visit to Howard Stern.



In the graphic interview, she told Stern that sex with Hef lasted
“like, two seconds. Then I was just over it . . . I’m not turned on by Hef.
Sorry.”
Even from Las Vegas, I’m pretty sure I could see the steam shooting out of Hef’s ears. Nothing gets under his skin more than someone
doubting his sexual prowess.
Unable to keep quiet and in a desperate attempt to salvage his
lothario reputation, Hef fired back at Crystal via a series of tweets:
Crystal did a crazy interview with Howard Stern today that
didn’t have much to do with reality. Is she trying to impress a new
boyfriend?
The sex with Crystal the first night was good enough so that I
kept her over two more nights . . .
Sure, her turn on Stern was a low blow, but I was disappointed to
see Hef stoop to her level. In the end, they both lost that war.
When the headlines disappeared, her new relationship ended and
people stopped caring about Hugh Hefner’s ex-fiancée, Crystal came
back to the mansion with her tail between her legs and the pair wed in
a low-key wedding ceremony on December 31, 2013. There certainly
must have been a measure of satisfaction for Hef’s ego. The woman
who had so publicly embarrassed him ended up crawling back after
all—just like he had tried to convince me to do after I met Criss.
My guest appearance on Hef’s Runaway Bride was the last time I
ever saw Hef or spoke to him. I continued to receive letters from him
after that, but I just threw them away, because they were always only
about him anyway. Three years after breaking off the relationship I
could finally say he was out of my life for good.



DESPITE ANOTHER SEASON OF stellar ratings for Holly’s World (seeing a
series high of nearly 2.5 million viewers), the show was canceled.
E! welcomed a new president at the same time, who decided she
no longer wanted the network to be in business with Playboy. “We
want to get rid of the trashy Playboy element,” she was quoted as saying. This hurt, since I had been trying so hard for the past few years to
separate myself from that brand.
Kendra’s show was canceled shortly after mine.
Sure, Playboy got me on television, but it was also because of
Playboy that I was taken off television. Many people assume Playboy
was my blessing, but most don’t know it was also my curse.
Truth be told, I was devastated by the cancellation. The cast, production, and I continued to bring in the ratings for the network, but
Playboy cast a shadow over my life and I couldn’t escape it.
I felt terrible that I could no longer provide my castmates with the
spots on the show that had brought them so much success. I felt like
the Giving Tree after the tree was reduced to a stump and had nothing
left to give anyone. I was worried that I would lose all my friends once
they learned Holly’s World was to be no more. Of course, that didn’t
turn out to be the case. Josh and I, for example, remained and still are
as close as ever. Angel and I suffered an estrangement for a few years,
but sometimes that’s what success can do to friendships.
I felt like I had just begun landing lucrative endorsements and
turning my press coverage around. People had finally started saying
“We love you on Holly’s World” instead of “We loved you on The Girls
Next Door.” I was scared that with the show’s cancellation, my positive
momentum could be stopped dead in its tracks.



“JUST DO IT,” my friend advised me. “They’re going to make it whether
you want them to or not. You may as well have your voice in there.”
In 2011, E! executives asked me to film for their True Hollywood
Story franchise. I’d been interviewed for the program before, but this
time the entire episode was going to be about me! While the idea of
having your own E! True Hollywood Story might be a sign to some
that you’ve made it, I felt wildly underqualified and the prospect horrified me.
But I haven’t even accomplished anything yet, I thought. My
story wasn’t ready to be told. I hadn’t achieved enough on my own outside of the mansion—and I didn’t want the hour-long program to be a
tribute to my days at Playboy. But after talking it out, I realized I
didn’t really have a choice in the matter.
Eventually, I gave the network my cooperation. In retrospect, I
feel so sorry for the poor producer forced to interview me. I did not
make her job easy. I felt like I had nothing but a trail of mistakes and
embarrassments to confess on camera (save for the previous two
years), so I was perhaps the grumpiest, bitchiest, most emotional mess
that had ever sat down for a THS about her life. The last subject she
had interviewed for the series was Katy Perry, who was no doubt upbeat, but she’s someone who’s really accomplished things. I was so insecure—I worried that my life’s story would be presented as that of
just another famous-for-nothing Playboy bimbo. Naturally Hef was
interviewed for the special (you really think he would miss a chance to
be on camera?) and his only real contribution was a chippy remark at
my expense.
“What I thought I had found in Holly, I really found in Crystal,”
he had said to the interviewer . . . as if that was in any way relevant my
story. He just couldn’t resist an opportunity to belittle me and to make
the story all about him.



But when the special finally aired, something interesting
happened: people actually related to me.
To my surprise, viewers sympathized with my unhappiness and
some even said they found the courage to reinvent themselves in their
own lives. Inspired by my story, some women told me they were able
to remove themselves from difficult situations, get over a breakup, or
find the motivation to get healthy. I was and continue to be truly
humbled.
Through these wonderful, honest people, I was able to reevaluate
how I viewed my own past and maybe give myself a bit of a break.
Perhaps sharing my story wasn’t such a bad idea, I thought.
Maybe I wasn’t defined by the mistakes I had made after all . . .
maybe those decisions were what allowed me to become the person I
was always destined to be.

CHAPTER 17

“It’s no use going back to yesterday, because I was
a different person then.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

K

endra? Appear in Peepshow? You’re kidding me, right?” I
laughed, barely able to believe the suggestion.
Before now, I’ve never spoken publicly about my falling-out with
Kendra. There were people looking to capitalize on the deterioration of
our friendship, and I refused to allow them to benefit from it. Throwing away a relationship for cheap publicity isn’t cute.
After E! canceled both Kendra and Holly’s World, Kendra’s series
was picked up by a smaller cable network. When production started
brainstorming ideas for Kendra’s new show, they called me and asked
me if I would like to participate. Always The Girls Next Door’s biggest
fans, the producers wanted to keep the “team” together in any capacity
they could.
“Of course!” I assured them. While there wasn’t necessarily any
upside for me to appear on her show, Bridget, Kendra, and I routinely
made cameos on one another’s programs. For us, it was a no-brainer.
That’s simply what friends do. Besides, it was fun.



When I was presented with plotlines to participate in, I was less
than thrilled with the options. I wanted to make sure that my appearance on her series felt organic, but I was beginning to get the impression that there was a hidden agenda.
Early into our conversations, they latched onto one particular idea
that they wouldn’t shake. They insisted that the network wanted sexy,
that they wanted career. And that they needed help with that because
at that point Kendra wasn’t either of those things.
One of them asked me to offer Kendra the role as my Peepshow
understudy for a weeklong stint. Besides being a total rehash of a
storyline we had done for Holly’s World with Angel, there was a whole
host of reasons I wasn’t comfortable with that happening. I had
worked hard to help make Peepshow a success and considered it a
huge part of my post-Playboy identity. I felt that to show Kendra performing in Peepshow, on television, even if it were only for one night,
would create the impression that it was just another Playboy-related
venture that was handed to any GND alumnus. Couldn’t I have anything of my own?
They continued to gripe, saying Kendra had no ambition, didn’t
do anything but sit on the couch, and had truly become famous for
nothing.
Over the past three and a half years, Peepshow had become my
baby. I busted my ass to create a successful post-mansion life for myself and I wasn’t going to just hand over the reins for the chance to be
on a show roughly 40 people would end up watching (okay, maybe a
little more than 40). It felt like I was being used.
Despite sharing a friendship and a common experience at the
mansion, Kendra and I were still very much different people. There
were times when I was compared to her and encouraged to follow
Kendra’s method, but it just wasn’t me. While she was quite a bit more



mainstream than I was, her “career moves” consisted of things like releasing an old sex tape or coming out with a line of lubricants. While
her tabloid coverage focused on positive things like her wedding and
baby her first year out of the mansion, lately her headlines had devolved to negative things like: “Why I Left Hank,” “Kendra Loses Her
Baby!,” “Kendra’s Secret Breakdown,” and “Sex Tape Scandal.”
Ummm, no thanks.
Since she moved into the mansion at 19 years old, Kendra had
never had to work for a thing her entire adult life. She went directly
from having cameras follow her as Hugh Hefner’s girlfriend to cameras following her being a football wife. Luckily for her, whether it was
Hef or Hank, there was always someone around to rescue her.
Were they seriously asking me to simply hand over the career I
had built by myself so her life could look more interesting on TV? It
appeared so.
“I worked my ass off to promote Peepshow and make it a success,” I continued, firmly and unapologetically. “The work I put into
this production actually means something to me. If I tossed in Kendra
as my understudy, people would see that on TV and think Peepshow is
just handed from one ex-Girl Next Door to the other. It would tear
down everything I’ve built to make myself an individual.”
I was told that it wouldn’t and that Kendra wouldn’t even be able
to do the show. That she would think she could do it, but she wouldn’t
be able to pull it off.
“The answer is no,” I maintained. “I’ll support Kendra on her
show, but I’m not handing my life over to her. No way.”
They finally conceded, before offering one final plea: “But think
about it. It would get you back on television!”
Did he really think I wanted back on TV that badly? I thought. I
couldn’t begin to imagine Kendra’s Peepshow run. First off, there’s no



way Kendra had the self-discipline to perform in eight live shows a
week. She didn’t possess that kind of work ethic. And I could never
unleash Hurricane Kendra on my cast and crew.
Sure, we’d been on excellent terms since we left the mansion, but
I knew for myself what a nightmare she could be to work with. Her incessant tardiness, endless excuses, and toddler-like tantrums had become a thing of legend.
After continuing to turn down the Peepshow understudy idea
again and again (they really were relentless), I finally agreed to shoot a
simple scene with Kendra at her new home—Hank’s NFL career had
ended the year before and they had settled outside Los Angeles—for
the debut episode of her series.
The plan seemed organic enough: she and I would simply talk and
catch up. Producers encouraged me to tell her about my career and
plans for the future—apparently this was intended to inspire Kendra to
get off the couch and build her own career, a story arc they hoped to
follow throughout the season.
When I arrived at her house in Calabasas, I was genuinely eager
to catch up. We hadn’t seen each other since filming Hef’s Runaway
Bride Lifetime special. She took me on a tour of her home, barking at
Hank to stay out of the shot as we passed him in the hall. I talked at
length about my life in Las Vegas, including my plans for Peepshow,
other opportunities I was considering, and wanting to get out of the
shadow of Playboy to continue to do things on my own.
As the conversation wore on, Kendra seemed to be getting more
and more annoyed. It was becoming clear that she didn’t like the idea
that she wasn’t the only Girls Next Door graduate to find success.
We wrapped our scene, hugged good-bye, and I jumped back into
my Range Rover for the five-hour drive back to Las Vegas—after all, I
had a show that night!



Before pulling out of the driveway, I shot her a quick text:
Thanks for having me over to your house! It was fun catching
up!
She didn’t respond, which was odd. Usually she was pretty quick
in responding to my texts or tweets, but I didn’t give it too much
thought beyond that.
A few weeks later, a field producer for the series asked me to place
a phone call to Kendra. They wanted to film her receiving the call from
me to set up the idea that I was coming over for the visit we had
filmed. After being rescheduled countless times because Kendra was
“not answering her phone,” “not coming out of her room,” or “not
showing up to film,” it became clear what was going on.
I spent five seasons on a reality show with Kendra—and her habits
hadn’t changed much. Instead of addressing the issue or having a mature conversation with producers, Kendra’s go-to method was passiveaggressive avoidance.
Oh well, I thought. If she didn’t want the scene on her show, that
was her business.
Despite the fact that the producers couldn’t coax Kendra into
shooting a phone call with me, they continued pressing the Peepshow
understudy idea. In the beginning, I was told “the network loves the
idea for the premiere” . . . then it became “the network loves the idea
for the season finale.”
And each time I said no.
“Besides,” I said the last time we discussed it, “I’m just uncomfortable with it. Something is wrong with Kendra. She doesn’t answer
my texts or tweets anymore—I think she’s pissed at me or something.”
My concerns were dismissed. “That’s just Kendra. You know how
she is—she never gets back to anybody.”



“Not really,” I said. “Actually, she used to always answer my texts
right away. Anyway, the answer is no. It just doesn’t feel right.”
When they showed me the premier episode of the horribly titled
Kendra on Top, it was clear what she was so irritated about.
As I rattled on to Kendra about my career, they cut to her
interview:
“I’m pretty competitive . . .” she stated at the camera. “Ya know,
I’m kind of already established, but I don’t wanna lose that. I wanna
gain.”
I could tell Kendra was annoyed and trying to be careful how she
worded what she wanted to say. She didn’t like being set up to look
less successful than me, even for one scene. While that wasn’t the intent—producers simply wanted to inspire her to get her ass off the
couch—the comparison couldn’t be helped.
The next thing I heard from her was a headline she retweeted:
Kendra reveals why she is no longer friends with Holly and Bridget!
I couldn’t believe what I was seeing. Kendra had apparently given
an interview to a tabloid explaining that she wasn’t friends with either
of us, as if she were somehow better than everyone else. “We’ve all
found our own little roads to go and that’s just the way it goes,” she
said, retweeting the article to her follwers when it came out. For
someone who was all of a sudden trying to act like she was better than
Bridget and me, she sure wasn’t above using us for publicity when she
needed it. Anything for a tabloid-worthy topic!
Hurt and confused, I retweeted her post, saying: Thanks for letting me know, Kendra!
Of course I wasn’t going to stoop to her level and address this only
on social media, so I decided to text her how I truly felt: that she was a
coward and that she tried to act like the “real” girl on TV, but she’s the
fakest person I’ve ever met—and that if she had a problem with me,



she should have confronted me like an adult instead of just going
silent.
This time Kendra responded and the exchange went something
like this:
Girl, I don’t have a problem with you. I just don’t like it when
people think we are friends, she texted.
Do you even have a clue how rude that sounds, what you just
said? I replied.
WHO ARE YOU????? I DON’T EVEN KNOW YOU! WE WERE
NEVER FRIENDS. IT WAS ALL JUST WORK! she responded in all
caps.
Wow, I’m sorry I was stupid enough to think we were really
friends. Have a nice life, I finally texted.
After that, I deleted her number from my phone. Kendra and I
haven’t spoken since, and I have to say, I don’t miss her.
FOR ALL THE THINGS that were going right in my life over the past few
years, there was still one area that I needed to get on track. The dating
scene in Las Vegas was pretty grim. During my three years as a single
lady, I had the worst luck in the dating department. I swear, I could
write a book on the types of douchebags that lurk around these days
(maybe I will!).
All of my life, I was an over-the-top romantic, but by 32 years old
I had become pretty disillusioned. I’d often wonder what I did wrong.
It seemed that spending my 20s at the mansion had caused me to miss
out on meeting “the one.”
I was alone because I wasn’t going to settle for less in a man than
what I wanted or deserved. For the first time in my life, I started to lay
plans to become a crazy cat lady. What would my life be like without



the marriage and children I had always envisioned in my future? It
looked like spinsterhood was becoming a distinct possibility, so I decided to ready myself for it.
It all sounds a bit dramatic, I know, but I had pretty much given
up when in 2011 I finally met the man I would marry: Pasquale Rotella. Isn’t that how the universe always works?
Pasquale and I met when he brought his Electric Daisy Carnival
festival to Las Vegas. He was around town a lot and we knew a few of
the same people, so bumping into each other was inevitable. I thought
he was good looking and he seemed like fun, but when we started talking (most of the time through Twitter—I used to be Twitter obsessed),
I wasn’t really expecting things to get serious. It wasn’t that I didn’t
want them to, I had just come to a point in my life where I didn’t expect anything romantic to work out anymore.
Boy, was I wrong! Not only did we completely hit it off immediately, we were instantly inseparable. He was perfect for me. He was
smart, funny, and sexy, and I was always my happiest just hanging out
with him. He was the total package and was also at a point in his life
where he was ready for a serious relationship. A little later down the
road, he started talking about wanting a family . . . and he actually
meant it! This is an important note: a man has to already know what
he wants. Don’t waste your time trying to change someone’s mind. It
never works.
And like they say: when you know, you just know. Our relationship got very serious very quickly and within a matter of months we
were practically living together. Despite our whirlwind romance, our
respective careers (he owns and operates his entertainment company,
Insomniac, while I was still consumed by my Peepshow schedule)
meant that making time to see each other required significant effort.



In early 2012, I decided not to renew my Peepshow contract for
2013, despite the lucrative offer presented to me. That year marked
my fourth year with the show, and by then, I was not only playing Bo
Peep but had also adopted the singing Goldie Locks role as part of my
performance. As much as I loved it, there wasn’t much further for me
to go with the production. And while I wasn’t eager to leave behind a
cast and crew that had become like family to me, somehow staying
didn’t feel right. I wanted to leave the show while it was still on top . . .
and was it ever! The schedule was so time-consuming that as long as I
stayed with the production, I wouldn’t have room to add anything new
to my life professionally . . . or personally.
I wanted to explore new career options, spend more time with
Pasquale, and travel the world. We even talked about starting a family
as soon as my contract was over. In preparation for this new life, I purchased a home in L.A.—one of the fairy-tale-style dwellings I had been
in awe over the first time I visited Beachwood Canyon in Hollywood,
several years ago while filming an episode of The Girls Next Door. Something I couldn’t even dare to dream about having for my own back
then was now a reality, thanks to everything I had done after I left the
series.
My move on to this “new life” would get an unexpected push forward in July 2012, when I got some surprising and amazing news: I
was pregnant!
Pasquale and I had discussed having kids—we even planned to
start trying as soon as my run with Peepshow was complete, but
everything happens for a reason and we received the fabulous, lifechanging news many months earlier than we had even planned to start
trying. I started to suspect something was off—and a trip to the doctor
confirmed the news. We couldn’t have been more thrilled. We wanted
to shout it from the rooftops, but the doctor suggested we stay mum



on our big news until our second trimester (miscarriages are common
during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy).
Keeping a lid on our new addition for the three months was brutal—but necessary. I knew the announcement would attract a lot of attention, so I didn’t want anyone to know until I cleared my first trimester. Looking back, I’m surprised no one at Peepshow guessed
when I suddenly stopped arriving backstage with my signature large
Starbucks iced Americano clutched in my paw!
My biggest concern was how I was going to finish my commitment to Peepshow—it would be impossible for me to perform through
the end of the year. I’d certainly be showing by then and I’m pretty
sure producers didn’t envision their sexy lead with a growing baby
bump. When I finally was able to break the news to my employers, we
decided how long I would stay in the show (through mid-October
2012, which marked the fifth month of my pregnancy), and they began
their search for a new headliner who could start a few months earlier
than anticipated.
(People sometimes ask me if I was worried that performing while
pregnant might somehow harm the baby, and my answer is “of course
not!” I was used to the physical demands of the show and my doctors
approved every move I made. If anything, I think performing made me
healthier than I would have been sitting on my butt doing nothing. I
had an amazing pregnancy and stayed in great shape—though some of
the costumes were altered to allow for a little more modesty, I didn’t
even have to loosen my corset throughout my run in the show. I believe that many sacrifices need to be made in order to do your best as a
parent, but I also believe you don’t have to abandon your whole life.)
I vowed not to cry on my last night, but that was impossible. The
outpouring of love I received from the cast and crew was just too overwhelming—and I couldn’t help the tears. These were tears of joy . . .



the best kind. Over the four years I spent with Peep, I’d grown tremendously: from the insecure, unsure Playboy outcast to the confident, successful mommy-to-be.
But it didn’t take long for the vultures to start circling.
In the wake of my departure, Angel, my understudy, was
summoned back for six weeks while Peepshow found and trained my
replacement. Before my dressing room door even fully shut behind
me, I received word that a certain someone had already contacted
Peepshow’s producers, begging them to hire Kendra for the lead instead of the rumored front-runner: Ice-T’s wife, Coco Austin.
“How dare you!” I yelled into my cell phone. I was irate, digging
my nails into the palm of my hand. After I had spent months explaining to him why this idea made me so uncomfortable, I couldn’t believe
he had the audacity to even attempt such a betrayal. I’d been foolish
enough to think we had developed a friendship over the last seven
years, but obviously, I was wrong.
“And I’m pregnant right now,” I screeched, my blood boiling. “I
don’t need the stress of a public feud with Kendra.”
He sat silent. What could he say? Finally he came back meekly
with the confession that he thought if there was a feud between
Kendra and me it would be good publicity for the two of us.
“That’s the kind of publicity Kendra likes, not me,” I said. “I don’t
want it!”
Despite his efforts, Peepshow chose Coco to debut as the new
headliner. After a few months, the show officially closed. It was a
shame to see such a wonderful show close, but as they say, all good
things must come to an end.
“RAINBOW,” MARY SMILED. “THAT’S a wonderful name.”



Mary O’Connor and I were sitting on her front porch waiting for
one of her girlfriends to pull up so we could drive to lunch together.
She was one of the few people I trusted enough to reveal my chosen
baby name to.
Most people think the name is an outrageous choice, but Mary
knew me well enough to appreciate my whimsy. I’d first heard the
name in middle school (a girl in my sister’s class had the name and I
thought it was the prettiest, best name ever). I never had it on my list
of my future baby names, though, until I became pregnant—and when
it resurfaced in my mind, it felt like the perfect name for our child.
And while many people think her middle name Aurora was simply
after my favorite Disney princess, it was also a name that is a little
more common in Alaska, where I spent much of my childhood.
I’m so thankful I had that last visit with Mary, because it wasn’t
long after that I received a heartbreaking phone call.
“Mary’s in the hospital,” my old friend Britney told me. “She’s not
doing well. Bridget and I are going to go visit her. Do you want us to
tell her something for you?”
As my due date was drawing nearer and nearer, I was on doctor’s
orders not to travel and was stuck in Las Vegas until after my delivery.
“Yes,” I managed quietly. At age 84, Mary had recently undergone
cancer treatments, but had appeared healthy and upbeat the last time
I saw her. Hearing that she was now on her deathbed was a shock.
“Please tell her I love and miss her and that I wish I could be there.”
The message wouldn’t be passed on, however. When Britney tried
to visit Mary, supposedly Crystal turned her away, saying Mary didn’t
want to see anyone. Strange.
To the best of my knowledge, Hef never visited Mary at the hospital. Probably because he wasn’t in the best health himself and rarely
left the mansion anymore, not because he didn’t care about her. In



fact, Mary was the only person I ever saw Hef be truly candid in front
of. Everyone else in his life, including his relatives and significant others, seemed to be held at arm’s distance, emotionally.
One of the few truly positive things that I took away from the
mansion was my friendship with Mary. Everything else that came
from that place was laced with darkness, a hefty price tag, or an eventual knife in the back. Mary was a no-nonsense, tell-it-like-it-is gem of
a lady. The world needs more people like her.
ASIDE FROM THE SAD news of Mary’s passing, I was in wonderful spirits
during the final weeks of my pregnancy. I couldn’t be more excited to
meet my little girl. Everything was coming together and my dream of
having a family was coming true!
Less than a week before my due date, I received a surprising call
from E! The network wanted to order an hour-long special about our
baby’s birth! I jumped at the opportunity! Not only would it be such a
cool thing for Rainbow to see when she got older and a wonderful family journey to document on camera, it was also a great way to celebrate
as I eagerly awaited her arrival.
E! brought an in-house production crew to shoot the special, and
they couldn’t have been more fun, professional, and easy to work with.
When I requested privacy for certain moments (no below-the-waist
shots during birth, privacy during breastfeeding), the crew looked at
me like I was crazy and one of the cameramen said, “We weren’t planning on shooting that anyway.” I was floored, but in a good way! I had
been so used to the crew being ordered to capture every instance of
nudity possible in my Girls Next Door days that I had been prepared
for a battle.



Being surrounded by the crew, even in the delivery room, made
me feel extra safe and supported during this new experience. They
made me feel like they had my back and were the perfect complement
to the love my family and friends were surrounding me with during
that exciting time.
Little Rainbow Aurora was born on March 5, 2013. Anyone who’s
pushed out a baby will hate me for saying this, but I actually enjoyed
giving birth. I chose to have an epidural and the entire delivery took
only two hours. Rainbow is truly a blessing and without a doubt my
greatest achievement to date.
The year 2013 turned into a time of rapidly checked-off milestones for me. Just three months after giving birth to Rainbow, I was
officially an engaged woman. Most little girls fantasize about the day
the man she loves asks to spend the rest of his life with her—and my
special day was nothing short of magical. Pasquale proposed with a
cushion-cut 40-carat yellow diamond ring surrounded by pink and
yellow diamond flowers, which was amazing, but the best part of the
ring was that he designed it himself with me in mind. He popped the
question at the very top of a Ferris wheel at his Electric Daisy Carnival.
Despite the magical, colorful sea of craziness below and the elaborate fireworks spectacle above, it was strangely calm and quiet in our
little booth atop the giant wheel. When Pasquale pulled out the ring
box and asked me to marry him, I exclaimed an immediate “Yes!” The
smile was plastered on my face like I was the happiest maniac alive.
How did I not see it coming? I thought. We had discussed marriage before, but with all the baby excitement, I was too preoccupied to
focus on the when and the where of it. It was all too perfect—and even
caught me by surprise.
I had never felt more loved than I did in that moment.



We married three months later on September 10, 2013, at Disneyland in Anaheim, California. Would you expect me to get married anywhere else? Our wedding was more beautiful and more perfect than I
could have ever imagined. We had the entire park to ourselves—including our own private viewing of the Fantasmic! water show and
fireworks that lit up the night sky just for us. The bridal party and I
were given the exclusive Dream Suite inside the park to get ready in.
The ceremony was held at the Blue Bayou restaurant inside the Pirates
of the Caribbean and our reception was in my favorite part of the park,
New Orleans Square. At the end of the evening, we left the wedding in
a horse-drawn pumpkin carriage. If that’s not the makings of a fairy
tale, I don’t know what is.
This feels like an appropriate place to wrap up this book: Holly
found her “happily ever after.” And I did. I believe Pasquale and Rainbow were always the future intended for me—and without embarking
on that remarkable, bizarre, twisted journey down the rabbit hole, who
knows if I would have ever found them.
But let that not be the moral of my story. True happiness doesn’t
come from simply getting married. I don’t believe a woman’s worth
should be measured by whether or not she is married (I’m still surprised how many people still think that way!). Marriage and family are
certainly beautiful parts of life, but I believe those things can truly be
appreciated only when we find, love, and respect ourselves first.
Pasquale didn’t come to me at a time in my life when I needed rescuing most—he came when I didn’t actually need to be rescued at all.
And because of that, we developed a true and meaningful partnership.
He’s my Prince Charming, but I didn’t need saving. I saved myself.
I won’t apologize for the choices I made, because all of them
brought me to the wonderful place I am today. But rest assured, my
journey is far from over.



Just like Alice, Wonderland opened up my eyes and prepared me
for my real life’s adventure . . . one that has only just begun.
And how she would gather about her other little
children, and make their eyes bright and eager
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the
dream of Wonderland of long ago.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

PHOTO SECTION
“AND WHAT IS THE USE OF A BOOK,”
THOUGHT ALICE, “WITHOUT PICTURES OR
CONVERSATION?”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland



Growing up in Alaska. (Personal collection)

Age 12, junior high in Oregon. (Personal collection)



Age 15, at cheerleading camp. (Personal collection)



Age 21, new to California. (Personal collection)

In Bunny costume. (Erik Kabik)



With my favorite Playmate, Jenny McCarthy. (Personal collection)



Bridget (left) and Kendra (right) behind the scenes of our first Playboy
shoot with photographer Arny Freytag. The directors’ chairs were gifts
from Arny. (Personal collection)



Sightseeing with friends in New York City while promoting our Playboy cover. (Personal collection)



From left to right, Bridget, Playmate friend Liz Stewart, me, and
Kendra at a signing, a blowup of our first cover hanging in the background. (Personal collection)



Dressed up for the mansion’s annual Halloween party with 2006 Playmate of the Year, Kara Monaco (right). (Personal collection)



Behind the scenes of our second cover shoot for Playboy. (Personal
collection)

We were so excited to see billboards for The Girls Next Door all over
L.A.! (Personal collection)



Filming my favorite episode of The Girls Next Door, a trip to my hometown in Alaska. (Personal collection)



The Peepshow marquee in front of Planet Hollywood. I couldn’t believe that was me up there! (Denise Truscello)

Performing in Peepshow. (Denise Truscello)



Modeling some of Marilyn Monroe’s clothes. (Denise Truscello)



The cast of Holly’s World (clockwise from top left): Josh Strickland,
me, Laura Croft, and Angel Porrino. (Personal collection)



Filming Holly’s World in Mexico. (W.B. Fontenot)



Claire Sinclair (left), a new cast member for Holly’s World season two.
(Denise Truscello)

Filming my birthday with (left to right) Jayde Nicole, Laura, Josh,
Bridget, and Angel. (David Becker)



Celebrating Peepshow’s third anniversary with Cheaza (left), director
Jerry Mitchell (second from right), and Josh (right). (Erik Kabik)

Welcoming baby Rainbow into the world. (Erik Kabik)

Engaged! (Chris Clinton)



Our wedding at Disneyland. (Denise Truscello)

My family. (Denise Truscello)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

“There ought to be a book written about me, that
there ought! And when I grow up, I’ll write one.”
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

To my husband, Pasquale, and my daughter, Rainbow, for all your
love, support, and inspiration.
To my collaborator, the amazing Leslie Bruce, who taught me so
much and helped me put some painful memories on paper in the most
fun way possible.
To Matthew Elblonk, who made this book happen in the right
way, making a big dream of mine come true!
To everyone at HarperCollins, thank you for this amazing opportunity. To Denise Oswald, for being the perfect editor, asking all the
right questions and leaving no stone unturned. To Trish Daly, Susan
Amster, Joseph Papa, Kendra Newton, and Michael Barrs for all your
hard work.
To Sue Madore for all your help getting this book out there.
To Jason Verona for keeping all my best interests in order.
To Max Stubblefield, who got this project rolling.



To everyone who was at E! in 2005–2011, without whom this
story wouldn’t be possible. Ted Harbert, Lisa Berger, Jason Sarlanis,
Brent, PJ, John, and so many more—thank you for turning that time
in my life into such an amazing opportunity.
To Virgine for taking such great care of Rainbow while I worked
on this book and to Gina for keeping my life together.
To my dear friends Bridget, Ashley, Josh, Claire, Angel, Vic,
Becca, Tanya, Mike, and Alex for your support every day.
To Denise Truscello for the wonderful cover photo, so many of the
photos in this book, and your invaluable friendship.
To my mom, dad, Stephanie, and Joe for all your support through
the years.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Holly Madison spent five seasons on the top-rated E! hit reality
show The Girls Next Door before landing the leading role in the Las
Vegas Strip smash hit Peepshow. She also starred in two seasons of
her own E! hit series Holly’s World. With her husband and daughter,
Holly divides her time between Las Vegas and Los Angeles.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.

CREDITS

Cover design by Amanda Kain
Cover photograph © by Denise Truscello
Author photograph © by Denise Truscello
Playboy Mansion and grounds map illustration by Rodica Prato

COPYRIGHT

DOWN THE RABBIT HOLE.

Copyright © 2015 by Holly Madison. All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION

ISBN 978-0-06-237210-9
EPub Edition JUNE 2015 ISBN 9780062372123
15 16 17 18 19 DIX/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada
www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom



HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com

@Created by PDF to ePub

