Welcome Friend,
Congratulations on your purchase of this
American-made genuine book. Each component of this book was selected to provide
you with maximum book performance,
whatever your reading needs may be.
If you are a woman and you bought this
book for practical tips on how to make it in
a male-dominated workplace, here they
are. No pigtails, no tube tops. Cry sparingly. (Some people say
“Never let them see you cry.” I say, if you’re
so mad you could just cry, then cry. It terrifies everyone.) When choosing sexual partners, remember: Talent is not sexually



transmittable. Also, don’t eat diet foods in
meetings.
Perhaps you’re a parent and you bought
this book to learn how to raise an
achievement-oriented, drug-free, adult virgin. You’ll find that, too. The essential ingredients, I can tell you up front, are a
strong father figure, bad skin, and a childsized colonial-lady outfit.
Maybe you bought this book because you
love Sarah Palin and you want to find reasons to hate me. We’ve got that! I use all
kinds of elitist words like “impervious” and
“torpor,” and I think gay people are just as
good at watching their kids play hockey as
straight people.
Maybe it’s seventy years in the future and
you found this book in a stack of junk being used to block the entrance of an



abandoned Starbucks that is now a feeding
station for the alien militia. If that’s the
case, I have some questions for you. Such
as: “Did we really ruin the environment as
much as we thought?” and “Is Glee still a
thing?”

If you’re looking for a spiritual allegory in
the style of C. S. Lewis, I guess you could
piece something together with Lorne Michaels as a symbol for God and my
struggles with hair removal as a metaphor
for virtue.



Or perhaps you just bought this book to
laugh and be entertained. For you, I have
included this joke: “Two peanuts were
walking down the street, and one was a
salted.” You see, I want you to get your
money’s worth.
Anyone who knows me will tell you that I
am all about money. I mean, just look how
well my line of zodiac-inspired toe rings
and homeopathic children’s medications
are selling on Home Shopping Network.
Because I am nothing if not an amazing
businesswoman, I researched what kind of
content makes for bestselling books. It
turns out the answer is “one-night stands,”
drug addictions, and recipes.
Here, we are out of luck. But I can offer
you lurid tales of anxiety and cowardice.



Why is this book called Bossypants? One,
because the name Two and a Half Men
was already taken. And two, because ever
since I became an executive producer of 30
Rock, people have asked me,
“Is it hard for you, being the boss?” and “Is
it uncomfortable for you to be the person
in charge?” You know, in that same way
they say, “Gosh, Mr. Trump, is it awkward
for you to be the boss of all these people?” I
can’t answer for Mr. Trump, but in my case
it is not. I’ve learned a lot over the past ten
years about what it means to be the boss of
people. In most cases being a good boss
means hiring talented people and then getting out of their way. In other cases, to get
the best work out of people you may have
to pretend you are not their boss and let
them treat someone else like the boss, and
then that person whispers to you behind a
fake wall and you tell them what to tell the



first person. Contrary to what I believed as
a little girl, being the boss almost never involves marching around, waving your
arms, and chanting, “I am the boss! I am
the boss!”
For me this book has been a simple task of
retracing my steps to figure out what
factors contributed to this person…



developing into this person…
who secretly prefers to be this person.
I hope you enjoy it so much that you also
buy a copy for your sister-in-law.
Tina Fey
New York City, 2011
(It’s so hard to believe it’s 2011 already. I’m
still writing “Tina Fey, grade 4, room 207”
on all my checks!)



Origin Story
My brother is eight years older than I am. I
was a big surprise. A wonderful surprise,
my mom would be quick to tell you. Although having a baby at forty is a commonplace fool’s errand these days, back in 1970
it was pretty unheard-of. Women around
my mom’s office referred to her pregnancy
as
“Mrs. Fey and her change-of-life baby.”
When I was born I was fussed over and
doted on, and my brother has always
looked out for me like a third parent.
The day before I started kindergarten, my
parents took me to the school to meet the
teacher.
My mom had taken my favorite blanket
and stitched my initials into it for nap



time, just like she’d done for my brother
eight years earlier. At the teacher conference my dad tried to give my nap time
blanket to the teacher, and she just smiled
and said, “Oh, we don’t do that anymore.”
That’s when I realized I had old parents.
I’ve been worried about them ever since.
While my parents talked to the teacher, I
was sent to a table to do coloring. I was introduced to a Greek boy named Alex whose
mom was next in line to meet with the
teacher. We colored together in silence. I
was so used to being praised and encouraged that when I finished my drawing I
held it up to show Alex, who immediately
ripped it in half. I didn’t have the language
to express my feelings then, but my
thoughts were something like “Oh, it’s like
that, motherfucker? Got it.” Mrs. Fey’s
change-of-life baby had entered the real
world.



During the spring semester of kindergarten, I was slashed in the face by a
stranger in the alley behind my house.
Don’t worry. I’m not going to lay out the
grisly details for you like a sweeps episode
of Dateline. I only bring it up to explain
why I’m not going to talk about it.
I’ve always been able to tell a lot about
people by whether they ask me about my
scar. Most people never ask, but if it comes
up naturally somehow and I offer up the
story, they are quite interested. Some
people are just dumb: “Did a cat scratch
you?” God bless. Those sweet dumdums I
never mind. Sometimes it is a fun sociology
litmus test, like when my friend Ricky
asked me, “Did they ever catch the black
guy that did that to you?” Hmmm. It was
not a black guy, Ricky, and I never said it
was.



Then there’s another sort of person who
thinks it makes them seem brave or sensitive or wonderfully direct to ask me about it
right away. They ask with quiet, feigned
empathy, “How did you get your scar?” The
grossest move is when they say they’re only
curious because “it’s so beautiful.” Ugh.
Disgusting. They might as well walk up and
say, “May I be amazing at you?” To these
folks let me be clear. I’m not interested in
acting out a TV movie with you where you
befriend a girl with a scar. An Oscar-y
Spielberg movie where I play a mean German with a scar? Yes.
My whole life, people who ask about my
scar within one week of knowing me have
invariably turned out to be egomaniacs of
average intelligence or less. And egomaniacs of average intelligence or less often end
up in the field of TV journalism. So, you



see, if I tell the whole story here, then I will
be

asked about it over and over by the hosts of
Access Movietown and Entertainment
Forever for the rest of my short-lived
career.
But I will tell you this: My scar was a miniature form of celebrity. Kids knew who I
was because of it. Lots of people liked to
claim they were there when it happened. I
was there. I saw it. Crazy Mike did it!



Adults were kind to me because of it. Aunts
and family friends gave me Easter candy
and oversize Hershey’s Kisses long after I
was too old for presents. I was made to feel
special.
What should have shut me down and made
me feel “less than” ended up giving me an
inflated sense of self. It wasn’t until years
later, maybe not until I was writing this
book, that I realized people weren’t making
a fuss over me because I was some incredible beauty or genius; they were making a
fuss over me to compensate for my being
slashed.
I accepted all the attention at face value
and proceeded through life as if I really
were extraordinary. I guess what I’m saying is, this has all been a wonderful misunderstanding. And I shall keep these Golden
Globes, every last one!



Growing Up and Liking It
At ten I asked my mother if I could start
shaving my legs. My dark shin fur was hard
to ignore in shorts weather, especially
since my best friend Maureen was a pale
Irish lass who probably doesn’t have any
leg hair to this day. My mom said it was too
soon and that I would regret it. But she
must have looked at my increasingly hairy
and sweaty frame and known that
something was brewing.
A few months later, she gave me a box
from the Modess company. It was a “my
first period” kit and inside were samples of
pads and panty liners and two pamphlets.
One with the vaguely threatening title
“Growing Up and Liking It” and one called
“How Shall I Tell My Daughter?” I’m pretty
sure she was





supposed to read that one and then talk to
me about it, but she just gave me the whole
box and slipped out of the room.
“Growing Up and Liking It” was a fake correspondence between three young friends.
Through their spunky interchange, all my
questions and fears about menstruation
would be answered.
“How Shall I Tell My Daughter?”
As I nauseously perused “How Shall I Tell
My Daughter?” I started to suspect that my
mom had not actually read the pamphlet
before handing it off to me. Here is a real
quote from the actual 1981
edition:
A book, a teacher or a friend may provide
her with some of the facts about the menstrual cycle.



But only you—the person who has been
teaching her about life and growing up
since she was an infant—can best provide
the warm guidance and understanding that
is vital.
Well played, Jeanne Fey, well played.
The explanatory text was followed by a lot
of drawings of the human reproductive
system that my brain refused to memorize.
(To this day, all I know is there are
between two and four openings down there
and that the setup inside looks vaguely like
the Texas Longhorns logo.) I shoved the
box in my closet, where it haunted me
daily. There might as well have been a guy
dressed like Freddy Krueger in there for
the amount of anxiety it gave me. Every
time I reached in the closet to grab a
Sunday school dress or my colonial-lady
Halloween costume that I sometimes



relaxed in after school—“Modesssss,” it
hissed at me. “Modesssss is coming for
you.”
Then, it happened. In the spring of 1981 I
achieved menarche while singing Neil Diamond’s
“Song Sung Blue” at a districtwide chorus
concert. I was ten years old. I had noticed
something was weird earlier in the day, but
I knew from commercials that one’s menstrual period was a blue liquid that you
poured like laundry detergent onto maxi
pads to test their absorbency. This wasn’t
blue, so… I ignored it for a few hours.
When we got home I pulled my mom aside
to ask her if it was weird that I was bleeding in my underpants. She was very sympathetic but also a little baffled. Her eyes
said, “Dummy, didn’t you read



‘How Shall I Tell My Daughter?’ ” I had
read it, but nowhere in the pamphlet did
anyone say that your period was NOT a
blue liquid.
At that moment, two things became clear
to me. I was now technically a woman, and
I would never be a doctor.
When Did You First Know You Were
a Woman?



When I was writing the movie Mean
Girls—which hopefully is playing on TBS
right now!—I went to a workshop taught by
Rosalind Wiseman as part of my research.
Rosalind wrote the nonfiction book Queen
Bees and Wannabes that Mean Girls was
based on, and she conducted a lot of selfesteem and bullying workshops with women and girls around the country. She did
this particular exercise in a hotel ballroom
in Washington, DC, with about two hundred grown women, asking them to write
down the moment they first “knew they
were a woman.” Meaning, “When did you
first feel like a grown woman and not a
girl?” We wrote down our answers and
shared them, first in pairs, then in larger
groups. The group of women was racially
and economically diverse, but the answers
had a very similar theme.



Almost everyone first realized they were
becoming a grown woman when some
dude did something nasty to them. “I was
walking home from ballet and a guy in a
car yelled, ‘Lick me!’ ” “I was babysitting
my younger cousins when a guy drove by
and yelled, ‘Nice ass.’ ” There were pretty
much zero examples like “I first knew I was
a woman when my mother and father took
me out to dinner to celebrate my success
on the debate team.” It was mostly men
yelling shit from cars. Are they a patrol
sent out to let girls know they’ve crossed
into puberty? If so, it’s working.
I experienced car creepery at thirteen. I
was walking home from middle school past
a place called the World’s Largest Aquarium—which, legally, I don’t know how they
could call it that, because it was obviously
an average-sized aquarium. Maybe I
should start referring to myself as the



World’s Tallest Man and see how that
goes? Anyway, I was walking home alone
from school and I was wearing a dress.
A dude drove by and yelled, “Nice tits.”
Embarrassed and enraged, I screamed
after him, “Suck my dick.”
Sure, it didn’t make any sense, but at least
I didn’t hold in my anger.
Thankfully, blessedly, yelling “Suck my
dick” is not the moment I really associate
with entering womanhood. For me, it was
when I bought this kickass white denim
suit at the Springfield mall.
I bought it with my own money under the
advisement of my cool friend Sandee. I
wore it to Senior Awards Night 1988,
where it blew people’s minds as I accepted
the Sunday School Scholarship.



That turned-up collar. The jacket that
zipped all the way down the front into a
nice fitted shape. The white denim that
made my untanned skin look like a color.
Just once I’d like to find an Oscars or
Emmys dress as rad as this suit.
Suburban Girl Seeks Urban Health
Care
It may have been a mistake to have my
first-ever gynecology appointment in a
Planned Parenthood on the north side of
Chicago. I was twenty-three and honestly,
there was no need. My whole setup was
still factory-new. But I had never been and
I had some insurance, so why not be proactive about my health like the educated
young feminist I was? I slipped on my
pumpkin-colored swing coat with the Sojourner Truth button on it and headed to
their grim location in Rogers Park. All the



windows were covered, and you had to be
buzzed in through two different doors. This
place was not kidding around.
I sat among the AIDS posters, proudly
reading Toni Morrison’s Jazz. Maybe later
I would treat myself to sweet potato fries at
the Heartland Café!
I was taken to an examining room where a
big butch nurse practitioner came in and
asked me if I was pregnant. “No way!” Was
I sexually active? “Nope!” Had I ever been
molested? “Well,” I said, trying to make a
joke, “Oprah says the only answers to that
question are ‘Yes’ and ‘I don’t remember.’ ”
I laughed. We were having fun. The nurse
looked at me, concerned/annoyed. “Have
you ever been molested?” “Oh. No.” Then
she took out a speculum the size of a milk
shake machine. Even Michelle Duggar
would have flinched at this thing, but I had



never seen one before. “What’s that device
f—?”
Before I could finish, the nurse inserted the
milk shake machine to the hilt, and I fainted. I was awakened by a sharp smell. An
assistant had been called in, I’m sure for
legal reasons, and was waving smelling
salts under my nose. As I “came to,” the
nurse said, “You have a short vagina. I
think I hit you in the cervix.” And then I
fainted again even though no one was even
touching me. I just went out like she had
hit a reset button. I’m surprised I didn’t
wake up speaking Spanish like Buzz
Lightyear. When I woke up the second
time, the nurse was openly irritated with
me. Did I have someone who could come
and pick me up? “Nope!” “You’re going to
have to make another appointment. I
couldn’t finish the Pap smear.” “WHY
DIDN’T YOU FINISH IT WHILE I WAS



OUT?” I yelled. Apparently it’s against the
law. Then she asked if I could hurry up and
get out because she needed to perform an
abortion on Willona from Good Times.
All Girls Must Be Everything
When I was thirteen I spent a weekend at
the beach in Wildwood, New Jersey, with
my teenage cousins Janet and Lori. In the
space of thirty-six hours, they taught me
everything I know about womanhood.
They knew how to “lay out” in the sun
wearing tanning oil instead of sunscreen.
They taught me that you could make a reverse tattoo in your tan if you cut a shape
out of a Band-Aid and stuck it on your leg.
They taught me you could listen to General
Hospital on the radio if you turned the FM
dial way down to the bottom.



Wildwood is a huge wide beach—the distance from your towel to the water was often equal to the distance from your motel
to your towel. And “back in the day” the
place was packed exclusively with very,
very tan Italian Americans and very, very
burned Irish Americans. As a little kid, I almost always got separated from my parents and would panic trying to find them
among dozens and dozens of similar
umbrellas.
One afternoon a girl walked by in a bikini
and my cousin Janet scoffed, “Look at the
hips on her.”
I panicked. What about the hips? Were
they too big? Too small? What were my
hips? I didn’t know hips could be a problem. I thought there was just fat or skinny.



This was how I found out that there are an
infinite number of things that can be “incorrect” on a woman’s body. At any given
moment on planet Earth, a woman is buying a product to correct one of the following “deficiencies”:
big pores
oily T-zone
cankles
fivehead
lunch lady arms
nipples too big
nipples too small
breasts too big



breasts too small
one breast bigger than the other
one breast smaller than the other (How are
those two different things? I don’t know.)
nasal labial folds
“no arch in my eyebrows!”
FUPA (a delightfully crude acronym for a
protruding lower belly) muffin top
spider veins
saddlebags
crotch biscuits (that’s what I call the
wobbly triangles on one’s inner thighs)
thin lashes
bony knees



low hairline
calves too big
“no calves!”
“green undertones in my skin”
and my personal favorite, “bad nail beds”
In hindsight, I’m pretty sure Janet meant
the girl’s hips were too wide. This was the
late seventies, and the seventies were a
small-eyed, thin-lipped blond woman’s
paradise. I remember watching Three’s
Company as a little brown-haired kid
thinking, “Really? This is what we get?
Joyce DeWitt is our brunet representative?
She’s got that greasy-looking bowl cut and
they make her wear suntan pantyhose under her football jersey nightshirt.” I may
have only been seven or eight, but I knew
that this sucked. The standard of beauty



was set. Cheryl Tiegs, Farrah Fawcett,
Christie Brinkley. Small eyes, toothy smile,
boobies, no buttocks, yellow hair.
Let’s talk about the hair. Why do I call it
“yellow” hair and not “blond” hair? Because I’m pretty sure everybody calls my
hair “brown.” When I read fairy tales to my
daughter I always change the word
“blond” to “yellow,” because I don’t want
her to think that blond hair is somehow
better.
My daughter has a reversible doll: Sleeping
Beauty on one side and Snow White on the
other. I would always set it on her bed with
the Snow White side out and she would
toddle up to it and flip the skirt over to
Sleeping Beauty. I would flip it back and
say, “Snow White is so pretty.” She would
yell,



“No!” and flip it back. I did this experiment
so frequently and consistently that I should
have applied for government funding. The
result was always the same. When I asked
her why she didn’t like Snow White, she
told me, “I don’t like her hair.” Not even
three years old, she knew that yellow hair
is king. And, let’s admit it, yellow hair does
have magic powers. You could put a blond
wig on a hot-water heater and some dude
would try to fuck it. Snow White is better
looking. I hate to stir up trouble among the
princesses, but take away the hair and
Sleeping Beauty is actually a little beat.
Sure, when I was a kid, there were beautiful brunettes to be found—Linda Ronstadt,
Jaclyn Smith, the little Spanish singer on
The Lawrence Welk Show—but they were
regarded as a fun, exotic alternative. Farrah was vanilla and Jaclyn Smith was
chocolate. Can you remember a time when



pop culture was so white that Jaclyn Smith
was the chocolate?! By the eighties, we
started to see some real chocolate: Halle
Berry and Naomi Campbell. “Downtown”
Julie Brown and Tyra Banks. But I think
the first real change in women’s body image came when JLo turned it butt-style.
That was the first time that having a largescale situation in the back was part of
mainstream American beauty. Girls
wanted butts now. Men were free to admit
that they had always enjoyed them. And
then, what felt like moments later,
boom—Beyoncé brought the leg meat. A
back porch and thick muscular legs were
now widely admired. And from that day
forward, women embraced their diversity
and realized that all shapes and sizes are
beautiful. Ah ha ha. No. I’m totally messing
with you. All Beyoncé and JLo have done is
add to the laundry list of attributes women



must have to qualify as beautiful. Now
every girl is expected to have:
Caucasian blue eyes
full Spanish lips
a classic button nose
hairless Asian skin with a California tan
a Jamaican dance hall ass
long Swedish legs
small Japanese feet
the abs of a lesbian gym owner
the hips of a nine-year-old boy
the arms of Michelle Obama
and doll tits



The person closest to actually achieving
this look is Kim Kardashian, who, as we
know, was made by Russian scientists to
sabotage our athletes. Everyone else is
struggling.
Even the Yellowhairs who were once on top
can now be found squatting to a Rihanna
song in a class called Gary’s Glutes Camp
in an attempt to reverse-engineer a butt.
These are dark times. Back in my Wildwood days with Janet, you were either
blessed with a beautiful body or not. And if
you were not, you could just chill out and
learn a trade. Now if you’re not “hot,” you
are expected to work on it until you are. It’s
like when you renovate a house and you’re
legally required to leave just one of the original walls standing. If you don’t have a
good body, you’d better starve the body
you have down to a neutral shape, then
bolt on some breast implants, replace your



teeth, dye your skin orange, inject your
lips, sew on some hair, and call yourself the
Playmate of the Year.
How do we survive this? How do we teach
our daughters and our gay sons that they
are good enough the way they are? We
have to lead by example. Instead of trying
to fit an impossible ideal, I took a personal
inventory of all my healthy body parts for
which I am grateful: Straight Greek eyebrows. They start at the hairline at my
temple and, left unchecked, will grow
straight across my face and onto yours.
A heart-shaped ass. Unfortunately, it’s a
right-side-up heart; the point is at the
bottom.
Droopy brown eyes designed to confuse
predators into thinking I’m just on the



verge of sleep and they should come back
tomorrow to eat me.
Permanently rounded shoulders
years of working at a computer.

from

A rounded belly that is pushed out by my
rounded posture no matter how many situps I do.
Which is mostly none.
A small high waist.
A wad of lower-back fat that never went
away after I lost my “baby weight.” One
day in the next ten years, this back roll will
meet up with my front pouch, forever obscuring my small high waist, and I will officially be my mother.



Wide-set knockers that aren’t so big but
can be hoisted up once or twice a year for
parades.
Good strong legs with big gym teacher
calves that I got from walking pigeon-toed
my whole life.
Wide German hips that look like somebody
wrapped Pillsbury dough around a case of
soda.
My father’s feet. Flat. Bony. Pale. I don’t
know how he even gets around, because his
feet are in my shoes.
I would not trade any of these features for
anybody else’s. I wouldn’t trade the small
thin-lipped mouth that makes me resemble
my nephew. I wouldn’t even trade the acne
scar on my right cheek, because that



recurring zit spent more time with me in
college than any boy ever did.
At the end of the day, I’m happy to have
my father’s feet and my mother’s eyes with
me at all times. If I ever go back to that
beach in Wildwood, I want my daughter to
be able to find me in the crowd by spotting
my soda-case hips. I want her to be able to
pick me out of a sea of highlighted-blond
women with fake tans because I’m the one
with the thick ponytail and the greenish
undertones in my skin.
And if I ever meet Joyce DeWitt, I will first
apologize for having immediately punched
her in the face, and then I will thank her.
For while she looked like a Liza Minnelli
doll that had been damaged in a fire, at
least she didn’t look like everybody else on
TV.



Also, full disclosure, I would trade my feet
for almost any other set of feet out there.
Delaware
Showtime!

County

Summer

(All names in this story have been
changed, to protect the fabulous.)
Gay Wales
In 1976, a young Catholic family man
named Larry Wentzler started a youth
theater program in my hometown called
Summer Showtime. It really is a terrific
model for a community program. Young
teenagers would put on daily Children’s
Theater shows for the community, giving
preschoolers access to live theater at a very
low cost for parents. The older kids would
direct those Children’s Theater shows and
perform in Broadway-style musicals by



night. In the process, all the kids would
learn about music, art, carpentry, discipline, friendship, and teamwork. It’s a fantastic program that continues to this day,
and I can’t recommend it highly enough.
Larry didn’t set out to create a haven for
gay teens, but you know how sometimes
squirrels eat out of a bird feeder? Larry
built a beautiful bird feeder, and the next
thing you knew—full of squirrels.
I took a job as the night box office manager
at Summer Showtime because my
eleventh-grade boyfriend said we’d have
fun there. He promptly broke up with me
to date a hot blond dancer girl to whom he
is now married, God bless us every one. I
should have known he and I weren’t going
to make it when for my seventeenth birthday he gave me a box of microwave popcorn and a used battery tester.



You know, to test batteries before I put
them in my Walkman. Like you give
someone when you’re in love.
Those first few nights of being freshly, brutally dumped and sitting alone in the box
office were not so great. I was heartbroken
and, because no one had central air back
then, I had to cry myself to sleep on the
floor under the air conditioner in my parents’ room. But then, like Dorothy’s in The
Wizard of Oz, my world went from blackand-white to color. Because, like Dorothy
in The Wizard of Oz, I was embraced by
the gays. They loved me and praised me. I
was so funny and so mean and mature for
my age! And with my large brown eyes I
really did look like a young Judy Garland
Lorna Luft.
Before my evening shift, I would hang out
with my new friend Tim, who ran the



costume department. Tim had the highest,
loudest voice you’ve ever heard. I could sit
there for hours listening to him screech
along to “And I Am Telling You I’m Not
Going” while hot-gluing Joseph’s Amazing
Technicolor Dreamcoat together because
none of us could really sew. Parents of the
world, this is where you want your
seventeen-year-old daughter spending her
summer—snorting her DQ Blizzard out her
nose from laughing so hard. The only person funnier than Tim was his meaner,
louder, higher-pitched brother Tristan.
One family, two impressively gay brothers.
That summer I got to know four families in
which half the children were gay. In case
you’re interested from a sociological point
of view, they were always Catholic and
there were always four kids, two of whom
were gay. What Wales is to crooners, my
hometown
may
be
to



homosexuals—meaning there seems to be a
disproportionate number of them and they
are the best in the world!
Tristan would egg me on to trash-talk the
little blondie who had “stolen” my boyfriend. Of course I know now that no one
can “steal” boyfriends against their will,
not even Angelina Jolie itself.
But I was filled with a poisonous, pointless
teenage jealousy, which, when combined
with gay cattiness, can be intoxicating. Like
mean meth. And guess who played Joseph
in Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor
Dreamcoat, by the way? You guessed it,
old Battery-Tester Joe. I got to watch him
in the show every night and then count my
stubs in a four-foot room while he and the
blonde left to get pizza.



He would’ve never given her a crappy battery tester. And if he had, she probably
would have shoved it up her twat and tried
to turn it on. (This is the kind of mean stuff
Tristan and I bonded over. Clearly it’s very
toxic.)
The unstated thing that Tim and I had in
common was that we had crushes on all
the same boys.
The only difference was, I was allowed to
talk endlessly about my feelings and Tim
was in the half closet.
Nobody thought he was straight, but he
wasn’t “out” either. He certainly never
made a move on anyone. His crushes
would manifest themselves in other ways.
Tim had a real job working at Macy’s, and
sometimes he would use his disposable



income to, you know, buy Rick McMenamin a baseball glove.
“You were saying the other night after rehearsal how you needed a new glove, so…
anyhoo,” he’d trail off. The nice thing was,
the straight boys didn’t freak out about
this, and they definitely kept all the free
stuff.
Lots of teenage girls have taken comfort
under the wings of half-closeted gay boys,
but how many of us can brag that her two
best friends in high school were twentyfive-year-old lesbians? I met Karen and
Sharon one day in the middle of our giant
thousand-seat auditorium. The kid who
ran the lighting booth, a roughneck girl
named Rita who would only answer to
“Reet,” was climbing from ladder to ladder
hanging lights for The Jungle Book and
cursing like a sailor with a corneal paper



cut. Karen was the improv teacher and
Sharon was the head scenic painter, and
the three of us found ourselves spellbound
by the spinning mobile of profanity that
was hanging from the ceiling. It was like
looking in the monkey cage but you can
understand the monkey, and what the
monkey is saying is “Fuck all these fucking
zoo people.” We started laughing and were
inseparable for the next six years.
Karen and Sharon had been a couple at
some unspecified time in the past but were
now just friends with asymmetrical haircuts. We spent days and weeks doing nothing, calling one another ten times a day to
schedule our nothing-doing. An entire
evening could consist of renting a movie,
such as The Stepfather or that one where
spiders come out of Martin Sheen’s face,
and making nachos. Do you remember
what a cultural phenomenon homemade



nachos were? If you are under thirty, you
probably don’t even realize there was a
time when people didn’t have nachos. We
just stood around eating crackers.
You know that game Celebrity that you and
your friends invented in college? Well, first
of all, you didn’t invent it. It was developed
by NASA to keep girls virgins well into
their twenties. And second of all, we played
it better than you because we played it four
nights a week. We wore it out. “Okay, this
is Joan Collins’s character from Dynasty.”
“Alexis!” “No, her full name.” “Alexis Carrington Colby Dexter!”
When we finally got tired of playing,
around midnight, we would switch to a
version called Celebrity Boff, in which you
could only write down the names of
celebrities you would sleep with.



Playing Celebrity Boff with two halfcloseted gay guys, two lesbians, and one
straight girl made for an easy game. Jodie
Foster’s name was always in there four
times. Antonio Banderas appealed to all
sectors. “This is that same one we keep getting—” “Princess Stephanie of Monaco!”
It is a testament to my parents that they
never reacted negatively to the four-yearlong pride parade that marched through
their house. They welcomed these weirdos
(they were weirdos in other ways, not because of their sexual preference) with open
arms and fed them all until they were sick.
Only once did my mother say, “That Karen
is a little butch, don’t you think?” I feigned
ignorance badly, “I not know what you
mean!” and slipped out for a night of samesex nachos and name yelling.



I guess I should also state that Karen and
Sharon never hit on me in the slightest and
it was never weird between any of us. Gay
people don’t actually try to convert people.
That’s Jehovah’s Witnesses you’re thinking
of.
No one was ever turned gay by being at
Summer Showtime, because that’s not possible. If you could turn gay from being
around gay people, wouldn’t Kathy Griffin
be Rosie O’Donnell by now? The straight
boys quickly learned to be accepting and
easygoing, and the straight girls learned
over the course of several years to stop
falling in love with gay boys.
By August, I was coming out of my gloom.
I took a free afternoon dance class where
we basically just did jazz runs back and
forth across the lobby. The teacher called
me “Frankenstein Arms” because I would



move my right arm in unison with my right
leg, like a Frankenstein. Since I had been
thrown over for a dancer, this stung. But I
persevered.
I was the youngest person in our group of
friends and I always had a curfew. I was
notorious for freaking out when it was time
to go. It didn’t matter if we were at local
eatery the Critic’s Choice enjoying mozzarella sticks after a rehearsal or at Tim
and Tristan’s house watching Sleepaway
Camp—the one where the demonic little
girl turns out to have a penis—when I had
to go, I would shut a party down. “Hurry
up. I don’t want to get in trouble.” Pleated
eighties Bossypants.
When the summer was over, I had made
about twenty-five new friends and was no
longer weeping into my mom’s radiator
cover. But most of the kids in Summer



Showtime went to the Catholic schools
down the road or were well into their twenties, so I didn’t see them as much once
school started.
After the Greatest Summer
I had to take eleventh-grade health in
twelfth grade. I had postponed it the year
before so I could take choir and Encore
Singers—it was kind of a big deal to be in
both, whatever. I was alto 1, but sometimes
they had me sing second soprano. I had a
solo in “O Holy Night” in a performance at
the mall. In downtown Philadelphia.
Enough! Stop asking about it!
The health teacher, Mr. Garth, had a thick
blond mustache—the universal sign of intelligence—and a rural-Pennsylvania accent that made him say “dawn” instead of
“down” and



“yuman” instead of “human.” One day, in
what I hope was a departure from the state
curriculum, Mr.
Garth devoted an entire period to teaching
us “how to spot and avoid homosexuals.” I
could not believe what I was hearing.
I don’t know what happened to this guy at
the Teachers College of Anthraciteville, but
he had some opinions. “These homosexuals, they’ll trick ya. They’ll fine out what
kinda music ya like, what kinda candy ya
like, then they’ll invite you dawn to their
house.” As I listened, incredulous, I
couldn’t help but picture a young Mr.
Garth being lured into a van by Paul
Lynde. “Hey there, sonny, my friends and I
were just going into the woods to enjoy
some Jethro Tull and a Mars bar. Interested?” Oh, the shame that must have
washed over Mr. Garth as “Minstrel in the



Gallery” came to an end and he realized
that was no Mars bar! But there was no
turning back. He had already eaten half of
it.
My blood started to boil as he continued.
“If you’re talking to someone and you think
they might be a homosexual, just run. Just
get out of there and tell the nearest adult.”
I stayed after class to tell him that I
thought he had misspoken. “I think what
you meant to say was ‘child molesters,’ not
‘homosexuals.’ ” He just watched my hands
move as I talked, not unlike a dog. It became clear that my school life and my
Showtime life were separate.
The Greatest New Year’s Eve Party
of All Time



The line between Showtime friends and
school friends was breached on New Year’s
Eve 1987.
My Summer Showtime friend Brendan had
a New Year’s Eve party. Brendan was a
very dramatic boy who would say things to
me like “Did you ever think that maybe the
man that did that to your face did it to
mark you so he could find you later in
life?” See what I mean about the question
being a reflection of the asker? When
Brendan lost himself in a long dramatic
rant, you could always shut him up by saying, “I like that monologue. Is it from
’night, Mother?”
He had a beautiful face with pouty lips and
that swoopy hair that was so popular during the second Reagan administration. He
was the scenic artist under Sharon and he
would do things like paint the entire floor



of the stage an hour before a performance
(ruining the white shorts the kids had been
asked to bring in from home to be in the
chorus of “Free to Be… You and Me”).
Then he’d disappear for two days, emerging with a ten-page letter of apology. He
was a mess, and his New Year’s party was
expected to be awesome.
I was a teetotaler at the time, and none of
my close friends were big drinkers. I went
with Karen and Sharon, and the place was
already packed when we got there. The kitchen and dining room were full of
Brendan’s athletic Catholic school friends;
the living room was packed with theater
nerds.
Brendan’s mom had locked herself in her
room upstairs. There was an unclaimed
dog turd in the hall outside the bathroom.



People sat in small groups, talking about
the other small groups that were just out of
earshot.
My ex and the dancer made a brief appearance, but I held my head high. I was wearing my best Gap turtleneck and my dates
were two adult lesbians, so yeah, I was
pretty cool.
The Summer Showtime kids had to weave
nervously through the jocks to get to the
Doritos.
Brendan’s long-suffering Catholic school
“girlfriend,” Patty, tried to bridge the gap
between the two groups. A sweet, quiet girl
with short curly hair and a face as Irish as a
scone, Patty seemed to be the only person
at the party who didn’t realize what
Brendan’s deal was—even the family dog



had registered his disapproval again on the
kitchen floor.
Brendan and I ran into each other on the
front lawn. He seemed to be in a particularly Oscar Wilde mood. “May I kiss you?”
he asked. Sure, who cares. After a tender,
playacted non-French kiss, Brendan suddenly “came out” to me. In my experience,
the hardest thing about having someone
“come out” to you is the “pretending to be
surprised” part. You want him to feel like
what he’s telling you is Big. It’s like, if
somebody tells you they’re pregnant, you
don’t say, “I did notice you’ve been eating
like a hog lately.” Your gay friend has obviously made a big decision to say the words
out loud. You don’t want him to realize
that everybody’s known this since he was
ten and he wanted to be Bert Lahr for Halloween. Not the Cowardly Lion, but Bert
Lahr. “Oh, my gosh, no waaaay?” You stall,



trying to think of something more substantial to say. “Is everyone, like, freaking out?
What a… wow.”
Brendan had clearly decided to make this
party his debut, and he wandered through
the crowd, performing his one-man show
in various locations.
Bored, I tried making out with Victor
Anthony, a straight kid who was cute but
kind of a wang.
He was the Cream of Wheat of making out.
I would try it every now and then, thinking
maybe I’d like it, but every time: no. He
really was a stunningly bad kisser. It was as
if he took a running start at your mouth.
Brendan’s stage kiss was way more skilled.
I went back inside and parked it with Karen and Sharon in the theater living room,



where Brendan was deep into Act II of
“coming out.” The Monsignor Bonner football team was peering in from the dining
area, hearing all of this. “Here’s a toast to
being free of other people’s expectations,”
Brendan
monologued,
“and
loving
whomever you choose.” In the background,
scone-face Patty was quietly giving people
coasters. Jesus, she was really not getting
it.
This evening was actually turning out to be
quite boring. But then it happened.
One of the drunk girls from the Archbishop
Prendergast side of the party wandered into the Showtime room and started making
out with Alexis Catalano. Everyone froze.
Patty looked on, scone-faced. This was unprecedented. Brendan talked a good game,
but these two were going at it—in public!
This was years before every pop singer in



the world started fake lezzing out at the
VMAs. It simply was not done. What would
happen next? Karen and Sharon went into
protective adult mode and pulled the two
wasted girls apart and took them upstairs
to a more private location.
Just then Brendan’s mom—who was totally
unaware of the proceedings—started
screaming and throwing everyone’s coats
down the stairs, which shall henceforth be
known as An Irish Goodnight.
Brendan’s mom may have perfected my
“party shutdown” move, but it didn’t stop
me from working it at the amateur level. I
followed the four women upstairs, ducking
the flying parkas, because it was almost
two A.M.: my special expanded New Year’s
Eve curfew. Karen was my ride and we
needed to get a move on. Alexis and jock
girl were so drunk they could barely



function. Karen and Sharon tried to convince them it was time to call it a night.
They would give them a ride home.
“Noooo, I loooooove herrrr,” jock girl
sobbed as Karen helped her get her coat
on. I said I’d be waiting in the car and they
needed to hurry up.
Meanwhile, Brendan stormed out of the
house and drove away, furious—probably
because he had “lost the room” when two
girls started going to town on each other.
After I’d been waiting in the car twenty
minutes and missed my curfew, I couldn’t
control my temper anymore. “Get the
dykes in the car!” I screamed down Childs
Avenue, banging my shoe on Karen’s dashboard and leaving a slight crack. My husband could tell you that I still get this
wound up when I’m trying to leave the



house on a Saturday morning and nobody
in my family has their shoes on.
It’s not a great quality.
(And just in case you were wondering,
yes—when he returned later that night,
Brendan tried to run Patty and his mother
over with the car. I believe it earned him a
Regional Theater Tony nomination.)
The Second Summer
My second year at Summer Showtime, I
was promoted to be one of the Children’s
Theater directors. I directed shows with a
cast of sixty twelve-year-olds and, I’ll toot
my own horn, I made some interesting directing choices. Such as pushing the Little
Mermaid around on a rolling office chair
papier-mâchéd to look like a large shell.



Her hair only got caught in the wheels
twice.
I knew everyone. I was fully immersed.
“Immersed,” Brendan would say. “You’re
so smart. Why don’t I know more people
who use words like ‘immersed’?” And then
he’d disappear for two days. He may have
been a drunk.
Sharon’s brother Sean was our “visiting
director” for the Mainstage musical. Everyone referred to him as Equity Actor Sean
Kenny. He was a member of the stage actors union! He was living the dream in a
basement-level studio apartment in Hell’s
Kitchen with a rat problem. We were all in
awe.
Sean was and is a skilled and confident director. I was excited to be his assistant



director on a murder mystery musical
called Something’s Afoot.
My first job as assistant director was to
make sure he didn’t cast the talented blond
dancer who had so easily stolen my boyfriend the summer before. I accomplished
this with the persistent and skilled manipulation of a grade A bitch. I made articulate
arguments as to why the other blond girl
would be better. The Dancer Girl was “too
overused.” It would be more exciting to
“use someone unexpected,”
and the other girl’s “look” was “more British.” A fat load of nonsense, but it worked.
Dancer Girl was relegated to playing the
title role in a Children’s Theater show
called Guess Again. Yes, her character and
the show were both called Guess Again. A
harsh punishment.



Obviously, as an adult I realize this girl-ongirl sabotage is the third worst kind of female behavior, right behind saying “like”
all the time and leaving your baby in a
dumpster. I’m proud to say I would never
sabotage a fellow female like that now. Not
even if Christina Applegate and I were both
up for the same part as Vince Vaughn’s
mother in a big-budget comedy called Beer
Guys.
Sean and I were Mentor and Mentee that
summer. I was eighteen, he was twentyseven. Sean taught me a lot about professional dignity. For example, this was when
“call waiting” was new, and if you left Sean
on the other line for more than ten
seconds, he would hang up. And our show
was a hit!



On both nights! The cast party was in a
backyard with paper lanterns. The cast and
crew mingled. It was very glamorous.
Summer Showtime alum Richard D’Attelis
was there. My friend Vanessa had gone to
her eighth-grade dance with Richard D’Attelis, and he had picked her up wearing a
baseball shirt customized with an iron-on
photo of Olivia Newton-John. It said
“Olivia Newton-John” in puffy letters on
the front and “Totally Hot!” on the back.
Richard had been the first of the Showtime
boys to quietly come out after his stint at
the Pennsylvania Governor’s School for the
Arts, an exclusive state-run arts intensive
that might as well have been called the
Pennsylvania
Governor’s
Blow
Job
Academy. Imagine a bunch of seventeenyear-old theater boys away from home for
the first time for six weeks. They were living in empty college dorms, for the love of



Mike! Literally! Think of the joy and freedom they must have felt, like being on an
all-gay space station. (I’m sure there were
one or two straight boys there, too, and I
imagine they did incredibly well with the
one or two straight girls.) Sean was flirting
with Richard. We were seated at a picnic
table at the party, and I realized they were
playing footsie under the table. I could not
contain my judgment. “What are you doing?” I demanded, trying to be funny and
controlling at the same time. They ignored
me. Richard got up to get a soda. I turned
to Sean. “He’s so cheesy and gross!” My
power-of-suggestion technique had worked
so well when I was screwing over that
blond girl. I used any ammunition I could
muster. “He smokes, you know.” As the
night wore on, I didn’t get the hint. I stayed
at the table with two people who were
clearly going to hook up. I tried some sarcastic eye contact as Richard told Sean



about his dream to turn Xanadu into a
stage play. Like that would ever work.
In my mind, I was doing Sean a favor by
trying to stop him from hooking up with
someone regrettable. “Oh, my God. You
know he’s only, like, twenty.” Sabotage
and saying “like.” I was really in a bad
place.
Sean shot me a look. I was out of bounds.
It’s one thing to be a wisecracking precocious teen hanging out with twenty-seven
year olds. It’s another thing to get in the
way of a grown man trying to get laid.
I don’t know what happened between
Richard and Sean that night, but the next
day Sharon called me to say that Sean was
very annoyed with the way I’d behaved.
She said she had talked him down because
“they all realized” that I had a crush on



Sean. “It’s natural.” They all realized? They
were all talking about what a baby I was
and how I must have a crush on Sean? “I
don’t.” I wept from sheer embarrassment.
“I really don’t.” But the more I protested,
the guiltier I seemed. And here, after
twenty years, is the truth. I really didn’t
have a crush on Sean. I had reacted that
way because I viscerally felt that what they
were about to do was icky. The stomachache I felt had nothing to do with a
crush. I had to face the fact that I had been
using my gay friends as props. They were
always supposed to be funny and entertain
me and praise me and listen to my problems, and their life was supposed to be a
secret that no one wanted to hear about. I
wanted them to stay in the “half closet.”
Equity Actor Sean Kenny did not live in the
half closet. He had moved away to New
York and was just back for a visit. He was a



grown man. My reaction to his hooking up
with Richard D’Attelis made me feel like
Coach Garth. I stroked my thick blond
mustache and thunk about what I had
dawn.
It was a major and deeply embarrassing
teenage revelation. It must be how straight
teenage boys feel when they realize those
boobs they like have heads attached to
them.
I thought I knew everything after that first
summer. “Being gay is not a choice. Gay
people were made that way by God,” I’d
lectured Mr. Garth proudly. But it took me
another whole year to figure out the second
part: “Gay people were made that way by
God, but not solely for my entertainment.”
We can’t expect our gay friends to always
be single, celibate, and arriving early with



the nacho fixin’s. And we really need to let
these people get married, already.
Before the final performance of every summer, all the kids were invited onstage and
together we sang “Fill the World with
Love” from Goodbye, Mr. Chips. Everyone
would cry their heads off. It felt like the
end of camp, and I imagine some of those
kids had more to dread about going back to
school than just boredom and health class.
With his dream of a theater program for
young people, Larry Wentzler had inadvertently done an amazing thing for all
these squirrels. They had a place where
they belonged, and, even if it was because
he didn’t want to deal with their being different, he didn’t treat them any differently.
Which I think is a pretty successful implementation of Christianity.



We should strive to make our society more
like Summer Showtime: Mostly a meritocracy, despite some vicious backstabbing.
Everyone gets a spot in the chorus. Bring
white shorts from home.

That’s Don Fey
Let’s review the cost-free techniques that
we’ve learned so far for raising an



achievement-oriented, obedient, drug-free,
virgin adult: Calamity, Praise, Local Theater, and flat feet.
Another key element is “Strong Father Figure / Fear Thereof.”
My dad looks like Clint Eastwood. His halfScottish, half-German face in repose is
handsome but terrifying. I searched the
audience for him during the sixth-grade
chorus concert and, seeing his stern expression, was convinced that he had seen
me messing up the words to the Happy
Days theme and that I was in big trouble. I
spent the rest of the concert suppressing
terror burps, only to be given a big hug and
a kiss afterward. It took me years to realize, Oh, that’s just his face.
It’s my face, too, it turns out. The
cheekbones later discovered there by a



team of gay excavators are courtesy of my
dad.
Don Fey dresses well. He has an artist’s eye
for mixing colors and prints. He wears
tweedy jackets over sweater vests in the
winter and seersucker suits in the summer.
His garnet college ring shows off his wellgroomed hands. He can still rock a hat.
My dad looks like he’s “somebody.” One
day when I was visiting him on his lunch
hour he ran into a couple of old high school
buddies in downtown Philadelphia. “Hey,
Don Fey!” one of the guys



called from across the street. “Oh my God,
Don Fey,” the other guy said excitedly. The
two African American secretaries waiting
at the light with my dad whispered knowingly to each other, “That’s Don Fey.”
Before I was born, my mother took my
brother to Greece for the whole summer to
visit family.



When they were finally coming back, my
dad washed and waxed his Chevy convertible, put on his best sharkskin suit, and
drove all the way from Philadelphia to New
York International Airport to pick them up.
(In those days, international travel meant
dressing up, smoking on planes, wearing
Pan Am slippers, and flying into New
York.)
Their flight was due to arrive early in the
morning, so Don Fey, who is never late for
anything, got to the airport just before
dawn. As he popped on his sweet lid and
walked across the deserted parking lot toward the terminal, he saw two black gentlemen approaching from far away. He
played it cool to hide his apprehension. He
was in New York, after all, one of the
world’s most dangerous cities if you’re
from any other city, and from far away in



the dark he couldn’t tell if the guys were
airport employees or loiterers.
As they got closer, he noticed they were
staring him down. He continued to play it
cool. Don Fey had grown up in West Philly,
where he lived comfortably as a Caucasian
minority. Of course these guys couldn’t
know that. His heart was beating a little
faster as they came within ten feet of each
other.

The guys looked at him intently, then one
turned to the other and said, “That is one
boss, bold, bladed motherfucker.”
That’s Don Fey. He’s just a badass. He was
a code breaker in Korea. He was a fireman
in Philadelphia. He’s a skilled watercolorist. He’s written two mystery novels. He



taught himself Greek so well that when he
went to buy tickets to the Acropolis once,
the docent told him, “
.” (It’s free for Greek citizens.)
Neighborhood kids would gather on our
porch just to listen to him swear at the
Phillies game.
(Andy Musser talked too goddamn much.
Games were often “over” by the sixth inning. “This goddamn game is over. The
sons of bitches choked.”)
When watching the Flyers, he would
change the channel during commercials
and he always knew exactly when to turn it
back to catch the start of play. When my
cousin marveled at this ability, my dad was
matter-of-fact: “You just wait ninety



seconds.” Isn’t everyone’s brain a Swiss
watch?
Don Fey is a Goldwater Republican, which
is his only option. If you’re Don Fey, you
can’t look at Joe Biden and be like, yes, I
want to be led by this gentleman with the
capped teeth. You’re not going to listen to
John Kerry pretending to empathize with
you about the rising cost of your medications. You certainly aren’t interested in the
“unresolved father issues” that rendered
Bill Clinton unable to keep his fly closed.
Don Fey is not going to put up with that.
Don Fey is a grown-ass man! Black people
find him stylish!
Don Fey has what I would describe as
pre–Norman Lear racial attitudes. Once
the Bunker family met the Jeffersons,
every interaction between blacks and
whites was somehow supposed to be a life-



changing lesson, especially for the white
people. My generation carries that with us,
only to be constantly disappointed by
Kanye West and Taylor Swift.
The twin house I grew up in was across the
street from the border of West Philadelphia where Don Fey grew up. Don Fey
certainly had friends of other races and religions. He has told me a couple times
about the night he kissed Lionel Hampton.
He was at a jazz concert as a teenager with
an all-white audience. At one point in the
show, Lionel Hampton would invite a woman from the audience to dance with him,
but the white girls were all too scared to be
seen dancing with a black man. To ease the
tension, Don Fey jumped up and fastdanced with Mr. Hampton, at the end of
which Lionel Hampton kissed him on the
forehead to a round of applause.



Conversely, he would tell us things like “If
you see two black kids riding around on
one bike, put your bike in the garage.” This
wasn’t racism; it was experience. Those
kids were coming from West Philly to steal
bikes. The social factors that caused their
behavior were irrelevant to a Depression
baby. When you grow up getting an orange
for Christmas, you’re going to make sure
the twenty-five-dollar bike you bought
your kid doesn’t get ripped off.
Norman Lear might want us to take time to
understand that those kids went to poorly
funded schools and that their parents,
while loving and dignified, were unable to
supervise their children’s behavior because
they were both at work doing minimumwage jobs, but by then our bikes would be
gone.



The late seventies were a dark time of
“family meetings” about “tightening our
belts.” The embarrassment of Watergate
led right to the Iran hostage crisis. Three
Mile Island was in our state. It was always
“Day 27” of something in Beirut. There was
an infestation of gypsy moths killing the
trees in our neighborhood.
I can definitely remember a period of time
when the gas crisis, the Carter administration, and
“Alan Alda’s bleeding-heart liberal propaganda” were starting to wear on Don Fey’s
day-to-day dignity.
One Saturday my dad got it in his head
that he was going to rent a rug shampooer
at Pathmark and shampoo our carpets. He
expressed this desire to my mother, who
said nonchalantly, “Ugh, those things



never work.” We still had a half-empty
bottle of rug shampoo from the one other
time he’d tried it. But Don Fey could not be
deterred, and I, his faithful servant, went
with him. We rented the shampooer,
bought a new full bottle of soap, and
loaded them into the back of the Catalina.
When we got home I was sent to play outside so my dad could shampoo the whole
first floor. I barely had my Star Wars figures lined up in the patch of dirt by the
basement steps also known as Tatooine
when I heard a commotion inside. My dad
was cursing. Objects were being rumbled
around. I got an instant bellyache.
The screen door flew open. The two bottles
of rug shampoo were slammed onto the
back porch.



The rug shampooer came tumbling out the
back door in a tangled mess.
“Your mother… is a witch!” my dad blurted
as he came outside. He meant it literally.
“She cursed me!” It would seem that the
rented rug shampooer did not work. “The
goddamn thing is defective.”
“Defective” was a big word in our house.
Many things were labeled “defective” only
to miraculously turn functional once the
directions had been read more thoroughly.
If I had to name the two words I most associate with my dad between 1970 and 1990,
they would be “defective” and
“inexcusable.” Leaving your baseball glove
in a neighbor’s car? Inexcusable. Not
knowing that “a lot”



was two words? Inexcusable. The seltzer
machine that we were going to use to make
homemade soda?
Defective. The misspelled sign at the Beach
Boys Fourth of July concert that read
“From Sea to Shinning Sea”? Inexcusable.
Richie Ashburn not being in the baseball
hall of fame yet? Bullshit. (Don Fey had a
large rubber stamp that said “bullshit,”
which was and is awesome.) Was it too
much to expect the rest of the world to care
about grammar or pay attention to details?
Shouldn’t someone at the Pathmark have
to make sure that the goddamn rug shampooers are in working order?
He carried the defective shampooer down
the back steps, the hose flopping around
on purpose just to annoy him. There was
sudsy water inside it, sloshing around,
mocking his dream of an orderly house.



“Son of a bitch!” As he backed our giant car
up the fifty-degree incline of our driveway,
scraping the bumper, he barked, “Get the
bottle of soap. Come on.” I was going along
for the ride back to Pathmark? Great. I
looked at the two identical bottles of rug
detergent on the back porch. One was new
and returnable. One was six months old
and half empty. But which was which? I
couldn’t tell! They were opaque. I knew
that word because I was in the Gifted Program, but it didn’t help me in that split
second.
Why didn’t I pick them both up to see
which one was heavier? Why didn’t I just
bring both of them? I would never be
placed in the Common Sense Program. My
dad honked the horn for me to hurry up. I
grabbed a bottle and dashed for the car.



We rode in tense silence to the Pathmark.
And, by the way, I get it now. I’m a working
parent and I understand that sometimes
you want to have a very productive
Saturday to feel that you are in control of
your life, which of course you are not. Children and Jimmy Carter ruin all your bestlaid plans.
And then your wife casts some sort of evil
spell?! Inexcusable.
I followed my dad as he stormed into the
Pathmark to explain to them what kind of
a country America was supposed to be. He
took the bottle from me to put it on the
customer service counter, and his face
went red at the weight of it. I had grabbed
the half-empty one.



And here was the indignity of the 1979 economy—we couldn’t afford to waste the
three dollars.
Sure, once the Internet boom came in the
nineties we’d all be throwing out half-full
mouthwash because we wanted to try the
new cinnamint flavor. We’d buy chamomile tea at Starbucks and not finish it. But
not Don Fey. Not in 1979. He was going to
have to drive home again and get that other bottle to return it. “Wait here,” he said
in a strangled voice.
He left me at the end of the No Frills aisle.
I stood there, fighting back tears, pretty
sure that it was illegal to leave your nine
year old at Pathmark. Unfortunately, I was
wearing a red polo shirt and shorts. With
my short haircut and doughy frame, no
fewer than three old ladies mistook me for



a stock boy. “Young man, where are the
plums?”
I only hope that one day I can frighten my
daughter this much. Right now, she’s not
scared of my husband or me at all. I think
it’s a problem. I was a freshman home
from college the first time my dad said,
“You’re going out at ten P.M.? I don’t think
so,” and I just laughed and said, “It’s fine.”
I feel like my daughter will be doing that to
me by age six.
How can I give her what Don Fey gave me?
The gift of anxiety. The fear of getting in
trouble. The knowledge that while you are
loved, you are not above the law. The
Worldwide Parental Anxiety System is failing if this many of us have made sex tapes.
When I was a kid there was a TV interstitial during Saturday morning cartoons



with a song that went like this: “The most
important person in the whole wide world
is you, and you hardly even know you. /
You’re the most important person!” Is this
not the absolute worst thing you could instill in a child?
They’re the most important person? In the
world? That’s what they already think. You
need to teach them the opposite. They
need to be a little afraid of what will happen if they lose the top of their Grizzly
Adams thermos.



Don Fey is from the Silent Generation.
They are different from their children.
They cannot be
“marketed to.” They don’t feel “loyalty” to
Barnes and Noble over Borders. If you told
Don Fey that you never go to Burger King,
only McDonald’s, because you “grew up
with the Hamburglar,” he would look at
you like you were a moron.
When my face was slashed, my dad held
me on his lap in the car to the hospital, applying direct pressure with the swift calm
of a veteran and an ex-fireman. I looked up
and asked him, “Am I going to die?” “Don’t
speak,” he said. So, yeah, he’s not the kind
of guy who wants to watch people eat bugs
on Survivor. It’s so clear to me how those
two things are related.



My dad has visited me at work over the
years, and I’ve noticed that powerful men
react to him in a weird way. They “stand
down.” The first time Lorne Michaels met
my dad, he said afterward, “Your father
is… impressive.” They meet Don Fey and it
rearranges something in their brain about
me. Alec Baldwin took a long look at him
and gave him a firm handshake. “This is
your dad, huh?” What are they realizing? I
wonder. That they’d better never mess with
me, or Don Fey will yell at them? That I
have high expectations for the men in my
life because I have a strong father figure?
Only Colin Quinn was direct about it.
“Your father doesn’t fucking play games.
You would never come home with a shamrock tattoo in that house.”
That’s Don Fey.



Climbing Old Rag Mountain
Let me start off by saying that at the
University of Virginia in 1990, I was Mexican. I looked Mexican, that is, next to my
fifteen thousand blond and blue-eyed
classmates, most of whom owned horses,
or at least resembled them.
I had grown up as the “whitest” girl in a
very Greek neighborhood, but in the eyes
of my new classmates, I was Frida Kahlo in
leggings.
For many people, college is a time of sexual
experimentation and discovery, and I am
no exception. After a series of failed experiments with Caucasian men, I discovered
that what I am really into is Caucasian
men.



And I mean Caucasian. Maybe it’s my way
of rejecting my Hellenic upbringing, but I
like ’em fair-skinned with old-timey manners and some knowledge of fishing. If I’m
honest with myself, I can admit that I’ve
known this ever since I saw Larry Wilcox
ride a motorcycle—on the back of a flatbed
camera truck—down the Pacific Coast
Highway. I like white boys.
This worked out perfectly for me in college,
because what nineteen-year-old Virginia
boy doesn’t want a wide-hipped, sarcastic
Greek girl with short hair that’s permed on
top? What’s that you say? None of them
want that? You are correct. So I spent four
years attempting to charm the uninterested. (It was probably good practice for
my future career on a low-rated TV show.)
I couldn’t figure out how to play it. I
couldn’t compete with the sorority girls
with their long blond ponytails and hoop



earrings. I tried to find the white-boylooking-to-rebel, but I wasn’t ethnic
enough to be an exciting departure. I
wasn’t Korean or African American or actually Mexican. I was just not all-the-waywhite.
I realized my predicament early in my First
Year. We don’t say “freshman” or “senior,”
etc., at UVA because Mr. Jefferson felt that
education is a lifelong process. Thomas
Jefferson—another gorgeous white boy
who would not have been interested in me.
This was my problem in a nutshell. To get
some play in Charlottesville, you had to be
either a Martha Jefferson or a Sally
Hemings.
During my First Year, I had a crush on a
brainy, raven-haired boy from my dorm.
This played out like the typical sexy coed
letter to Penthouse. He would ask me at



least once a day if I had ever seen the
movie Full Metal Jacket. I would remind
him that I had not. He would then describe
parts of it to me.
After several weeks of mistaking this for
flirtation, I tried to kiss him one night by
the Monroe Hill dorms and he literally ran
away. Not figuratively. Literally.
I did go to one fraternity formal with a devastatingly handsome guy named Awbrey
Madison Cartwright III from Georgia. I
mean, this guy looked like Clark Kent, no
joke. He held my chair for me and opened
doors. He was genteel and attentive. There
was only one problem. Here’s how our exchange went when he invited me to the
formal:



Tina sits on the steps in front of the theater
building, chatting with friends from acting
class.
Awbrey Cartwright approaches.
TINA: Hey, Awbrey, you’re gay, right?
AWBREY: (thrown) What? No. I was coming over here to ask if you want to go to my
formal with me.
TINA: Oh. Sure.
I was right, by the way. He was for dudes.
So you can see why, when I occasionally
had a little success with a heterosexual
white male, I dug in and hung on for dear
life. And this is why I climbed Old Rag
Mountain at night.



There was a kid, older than me, an architecture student who did plays in the drama
department on the side. I won’t use his real
name because I think he’d find out about it
and it would give him too much satisfaction. I’ll refer to him instead by how he
looked at the time, which was like a handsome Robert Wuhl. Go spend an hour trying to picture exactly what that could be
and pick up the book again when you’ve
got it.
Welcome back.
Handsome Robert Wuhl and I were in a
few plays and some acting classes together.
He seemed to appreciate my sense of humor. Like all boys at that time, he tried to
talk like David Letterman, which I appreciated. I don’t remember how we first came
to be making out in a car, but it was awesome so I kept doing it. Should it have



been a “red flag” to me that these incidents
would only take place under cover of night,
in the back driveway behind my on-campus housing? Absolutely. Was it “not great”
that there was never any actual “date” before these events and that it was a secret?
Of course. But I finally had my hands on a
thin-lipped white boy so everybody just
shut up about it!
Secret make-out time went on for a while.
Handsome Robert Wuhl claimed to have
some ethical/religious reasons for not going all the way, which was fine by me, as I
would have been terrified. I say “claimed”
because I think it was closer to the truth
that he was just a control freak who
thought he should save himself for
someone hot.
Sometimes there would be a big drama department event, like a party to celebrate



the opening of The Robber Bridegroom or
a wine and cheese reception to welcome
guest artist Aaron Sorkin (totally true).
Handsome Robert Wuhl would take a
pretty date to the party while I attended
with friends, and then he’d pick me up
later for car sports. Sometimes we would
just drive around. We hit a deer once.
Why were we just driving around the Blue
Ridge Mountains? To this day I do not understand what this boy was up to. Was it a
control experiment to see how much boring nothingness I would put up with before
we finally made out? Possibly.
We did eventually go on kind of a date. He
took me to the mall to help him shop for a
present for another girl, and he bought me
a sandwich at Hickory Farms. “You can
really eat a lot,” he laughed when I finished
it. I was certain that he would eventually be



so impressed with my ability to eat like one
of the guys that he would want me to be his
girlfriend.
So when HRW asked me casually if I’d like
to climb Old Rag Mountain with him, I
said yes immediately, then raced home to
tell my roommates. Clearly I was very special to him. Why else would he invite me to
climb a nearby mountain? They were
skeptical.
I met HRW the next evening at his offcampus apartment. Yes, the climb was going to be at night. I didn’t question this because I didn’t know anything about rock
climbing and I assumed that we were in
this for the romance. He introduced me to
one of his roommates, Jess or Chris or
something. He was a wiry little guy who
would be joining us on the climb. This was
news to both me and Jess-Chriss. To say he



was unfriendly would be the biggest understatement since the captain of the Hindenberg said “I smell gas.”* He alternated
between ignoring me and shooting me disdainful looks that clearly said “Who is this
ugly off-brand non-sorority girl ruining our
homo-erotic bro-times?”
We drove out of town a little ways, listening to Peter Gabriel’s “In Your Eyes.” HRW
played that song constantly. He was very
deep. Did I mention yet that he always
wore a small shell necklace and he told me
that he was never going to take it off until
Apartheid ended?
It was dusk when we got to the bottom of
Old Rag, and when HRW and Jess-Chriss
realized that neither of them had brought
flashlights. After a quick debate about
whose fault it was, they decided it didn’t
matter and we should just start climbing.



The first leg of our journey was the walk
from the parking lot to the beginning of the
actual trail.
It was about a mile and a half. By the time
we got to the foot of the mountain, I was
already nauseous from overexertion and
trying to hide it. I asked for some water.
“Aw, are you kidding me?” The two bros
looked blankly at each other. They had also
forgotten to bring any water.
The next, more difficult portion of the trail
was the “rock scramble,” a feat requiring
serious concentration to find a foothold
and safely navigate up, over, and in
between slippery rocks. It was getting dark
now, but there was bright moonlight. It
was difficult, but I was actually enjoying
the challenge. Jess-Chriss continued to
wish I was dead and/or better looking.



HRW climbed ahead of us both, showing
off. I learned that night that there are
markers on these kinds of trails, one color
for the easy path, one color for the intermediate path. I also learned that sometimes, especially at night, these markers
are hard to see.
Soon HRW told us he was “going off the
trail” and he’d meet us after a while.
Neither Jess-Chriss nor I was happy about
this, but I guess HRW was just too good a
climber to be held back. Jess-Chriss and I
climbed along in silence for about twenty
minutes. If Jess-Chriss had trouble finding
the next marker he certainly didn’t get any
help from me, because I was a hiking
novice. I was wearing wrestling shoes, for
example. Jess-Chriss kept calling ahead to
HRW to “stop showing off” and “stop being
a dick.” HRW



would call back through the dark that he
just wanted to try something and he’d be
back on the trail in a few minutes. And
then we heard it. A grunt and the sound of
little rocks rolling down bigger rocks and
then a sound like a bag of laundry bouncing and scraping down your basement
steps. That idiot had fallen off the
mountain.
Jess-Chriss and I must have had the same
thought: “Am I going to have to explain to
this kid’s mother how he died?”
TINA: We were climbing Old Rag Mountain in the dark on a weeknight.
MOTHER WUHL: Is this your girlfriend,
young man?
JESS-CHRISS: No.



MOTHER WUHL: Were you my son’s
girlfriend?
TINA: No, ma’am, but he did once tell me
that I could be really pretty if I lost weight.
MOTHER WUHL: What the hell were you
kids doing up there?!
TINA: Well, I can’t speak for Jess-Chriss,
but I was hoping for a leisurely night-climb
followed by some over-the-jeans action.
JESS-CHRISS: Me, too. But then she was
there.
We called frantically to HRW. After a few
minutes, he answered. We followed his
voice back down the trail and found him.
Jess-Chriss climbed out onto the rocks to
help HRW over to the trail. He was banged
up, but it was somehow decided that we
should continue up the mountain. The last



half mile or so was not as steep, and we finally made it to the smooth granite top,
where we sat down to take in the beautiful
dark panorama of the Shenandoah Valley.
HRW motioned for me to sit near him, and
Chriss-Jess knew instinctively to go sit far
away. Tired, dehydrated, and nauseous, I
was still ready to try to make this work if
there was any funny business to be had.
But HRW didn’t touch me. Instead he
stared wistfully out at the night sky and
told me about the last time he’d climbed
Old Rag. It was two days prior, during daylight. He had brought his friend Gretchen
up here for lunch. He really liked her, he
confided in me. Liked her so much that he
didn’t quite know what to do about it. After
they had gotten all the way to the top and
had the picnic lunch he’d prepared, he
offered her a piece of Trident gum, and
Gretchen—he had to stop and smile at the
adorableness of this—Gretchen had asked



him to tear the piece of Trident in half because it was too big for her. “Can you believe that?” he marveled. A girl so feminine
and perfect that half a piece of Trident was
the most she could handle.
I tried to process what this meant for my
evening.
“So… you and I will not be dry humping,
then?”
***
The way down from Old Rag is a forest
road. We found a stream in the woods and
finally got a drink of water. We scooped it
up with our hands and it was the greatest,
most satisfying drink of water I ever had in
my life. “Oh the water, / Get it myself from
the mountain stream,” I sang over and over
again in my head. I was listening to a lot of



Van Morrison at the time, because I was
also very deep.
It was sunrise by the time HRW dropped
me off. As weird as the night’s events had
been, I couldn’t help but be excited about
the fact that I had climbed a mountain. I
never would have thought I could do that. I
think someone should design exercise machines that reward people with sex at the
end of their workouts, because people will
perform superhuman feats for even the
faint hope of that.
As I crawled into my bottom bunk, I
thought about how I had climbed Old Rag.
I thought about Gretchen, the girl who
could only accommodate half a piece of
gum. “I hope you marry her,” I imagined
saying to HRW, “and I hope she turns out
to have a cavernous vagina.”



Young Men’s Christian Association
At 5:10 A.M., the el train from the Morse
stop in Chicago to the Davis St. stop in
Evanston is surprisingly safe for young
white women. The only people on the train
at that hour are Polish women on their way
home from cleaning office buildings all
night. They share plastic containers of pale
Slavic food that you know is buttery and
delicious. It’s just potatoes, rice, meat, and
cabbage in an endless series of
combinations.
My first and only day job (so far) was at the
YMCA in Evanston, Illinois. I had moved
to Chicago on Halloween of 1992, pulling
into Rogers Park with people whipping
eggs at my dad’s Pontiac in accordance
with the holiday.



I had never waited tables, and my attempt
to lie about that to the manager of the
Skokie, Illinois, Ruby Tuesday was unsuccessful. “Where did you work?” “The Carriage House in Havertown, Pennsylvania.”
My more worldly friend from home had
told me to make up a restaurant and give
them her phone number. “Did you do hand
service or tray service?” “Tray.” My friend
from home had told me to say “tray service” because it’s easier. “What was your
favorite thing about waiting tables?” My
friend from home had not anticipated this
question. “Um… the children. Waiting on
cute kids… It was a family… restaurant.”
Game over. While “the children” may be a
good nonsense answer for a Miss Universe
contestant or a gubernatorial candidate,
anyone who has ever waited tables—or
simply gone to a restaurant with a
child—knows that children are the soulsucking worst. They take all the sugar



packets out of the bowl, spill milk all over
the place, and their wasted meals only cost
five dollars, as compared to a nice boozedrinking adult to whom you might be able
to up-sell a crispy onion-and-jalapeño
crappetizer. I did not get the waiting job.
I applied for a job as the night box office
manager of a small theater company in
Boystown. The job paid about five dollars
an hour for a four-hour shift, so I was surprised to find that it required a lengthy interview with the artistic director of the
theater. I had a degree in drama, I explained. We talked (meaning she talked)
about playwrights we (she) liked. It was
between me and another girl for the job,
and she needed to know what I had to offer
the Tiny Pretentious Theater Company
because



“We like to think of ourselves as the most
exciting theater company in Chicago.” I
tried a joke. “I like to think of myself as the
most beautiful woman in the world. But
where will that get either of us, really?”
The other girl got the job.
My mother arranged for a friend to see me
at a downtown lawyer’s office for a receptionist job.
I wore the electric blue polyester Hillary
Clinton power suit that my roommate and
I shared for such occasions. The hourlong
train ride and scramble to find the exact
address had made me late, and by the time
I got to the interview I was sweating my
roommate’s BO out of the suit. The stench
of every drink and every cigarette she’d
had the last time she wore it filled the highend office in which I interviewed.



Between the suit, its booze cloud, and my
thick virgin eyebrows, I was deemed unfit
to answer phones in plain view. I was turning out to be college educated and unemployable in even the most basic way.
Thankfully, my electric-blue-suitmate was
an uninhibited vagina about town. She
hooked up with an early Obama prototype
named Marcus who worked at the Evanston YMCA. They were looking for
someone to work the front desk from 5:30
A.M. to 2:30 P.M. I got the job! Evanston is
the diverse suburb just north of Chicago
where Northwestern University is. The
YMCA there was a great mix of a high-end
yuppie fitness facility, a wonderful community resource for families, and an oldschool residence for disenfranchised men.
It may also have been the epicenter of all
human grimness.



There was a resident named Mr. Engler
who wore a wig on top of his hair like a hat.
He came downstairs once a week to get his
Meals on Wheels, which were left with me.
I developed a One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
Nest style of professionalism. I’ve always
been a Zelig that way. I’m the jerk who
starts to drawl when talking to Southerners
and I get very butch very fast when playing
organized sports.
“Here we go! Hands on knees, ladies!” So
when it came to the weird residents at the
Y, I leaned right into the role of respectful,
put-upon caregiver.
“Mr. Engler, your meals are here.” He
would say nothing and make no eye contact as he slid the containers toward himself with his Howard Hughes fingernails.
“You have a good day, sir.” I would go back



to folding towels with stoic dignity, like Michael Learned on Nurse.
“Sir, may I see your room key?” I’d bark
across the lobby like a young Betty Thomas
on Hill Street Blues. The residents weren’t
allowed to have guests up in their rooms,
and every now and then a guy would come
in with a friend wearing a big coat and a
hat and you’d realize it was a woman.
These borderline-homeless guys were
sneaking women up to their rooms, which
only goes to show that women continue to
corner the market on low gag reflex.
Not all the residents were catatonic. There
was Joe the mail guy. Joe had a big white
mustache and a friendly Daffy Duck speech
impediment from missing teeth. He
straddled the worlds of the residence and
the office because he had a part-time job
sorting the mail. “Morning, Joe.” I’d smile



like Marilu Henner in Taxi. “Whath’s up,
kid?” Joe would fire back. We’d goof on
our coworkers and laugh it up at the members who gave us a hard time. All that was
missing was the studio audience and an
eighty-thousand-dollar-an-episode salary.
Donna worked the phones. A heavyset redheaded gal with no makeup and big fleshy
hands, Donna was harder to play opposite.
Generally, if she was complaining about
some work situation, you could pass the
time by agreeing with her, but it had to be
done in a specific way. All the complaining
had to be done with very few words and no
dramatic flair. To rant and rave would be
too show-offy. Donna would never “hold
court” and you shouldn’t either. Her complaints were like little WWII telegrams of
bad news.



DONNA: They’re making us work on
Thanksgiving.
ME: No way. Are you kidding me?
DONNA: Members want to work out.
ME: That sucks. Weren’t you gonna go visit
your daughter in Indiana?
DONNA: Postponed.
But do not try to get ahead of Donna and
initiate the complaining, no matter how
sure you are that she’ll agree. Because
Donna will leave you hanging every time.
ME: Can you believe they’re cutting our
lunch down to half an hour, lowering our
pay by ten percent, taking away our insurance, and making us eat dirt?!



DONNA: I don’t go to doctors. I like dirt
anyway, so… fine by me.
Donna was an enigma wrapped in bacon
wrapped in a crescent roll.
One Monday, Donna came in and said that
her husband had had a heart attack over
the weekend. And, by the way, she didn’t
open with this. She slipped it in about
twenty minutes into her shift. She said her
husband started having chest pains on
Saturday. On their way to the ER, he made
her stop at Burger King because he knew
once he got to the hospital “they’d never let
him have that stuff again.” She didn’t say
anything else about it, but I covered the
phones for her a couple times that day
while she went to the bathroom, presumably to cry.



That’s the main thing I learned in that
job—how to be a considerate coworker.
Cover the phones for someone so they can
pee. Punch someone’s time card in for
them after lunch so they can stop and buy
a birthday card. Help people when their register doesn’t add up. Don’t be a tattletale.
I’m the kind of person who likes to feel like
part of a community. I will make strange
bedfellows rather than have no bedfellows.
In high school I had this friend for a while
named Dawn. We were sitting around my
house watching MTV one day when a Tina
Turner video came on. On the stage behind
Tina Turner was a set of giant letters
spelling out TINA.
DAWN: Wow. Can you even imagine seeing your name that big?
ME: Yeah, well, that is my name.



DAWN: What? Oh. Yeah.
We could rap like that for hours.
The point is, I liked the YMCA job at first
because I wanted so desperately to like it.
My day wasn’t wall-to-wall grimness. The
members of the gym were perfectly nice
yuppies and young moms.
There was a gorgeous redheaded baby I
called Big Head Bob who brightened my
day whenever he came in for “Toddler Gym
N Stuff N Mommy N Thangs.”
The Y had a preschool attached to it, and
the parade of little kids coming over to
swim was adorable and life affirming. I developed a crush on a shoulderless young
preschool teacher named Eli.
He was a complete nerd, but he had big
brown eyes and he was great with the kids,



and remember, when you work in what is
basically a cage that you’re not allowed to
leave, your choices are limited to what
strolls by.
Which isn’t to say I didn’t have any other
options. I was “hit on” by a resident once.
He was a forty-something white guy who
was only there for a week or so. He told us
all that he was in town scouting locations
for a movie. I don’t know what kind of
movie would put their locations scout up at
a YMCA, but if I had to guess I would say it
was not Titanic. Anyway, this guy seemed
almost normal until he walked up to me at
the front desk, handed me a little cardboard box, said, “Voulez vous couchez avec
moi?” and walked away. In the box was a
packet of SweeTarts and two used Linda
Ronstadt tapes.
Needless to say, we married in the spring.



Eli the Preschool Teacher—which is what
he’d be called if this were Fiddler on the
Roof—was also an aspiring actor, so I invited him to come see a staged reading of a
play I was in. He said yes and then showed
up with his girlfriend, who was a doctor.
She had about as much personality as he
had shoulders.
I settled into a daily routine. Wake up at
4:40 A.M., shower, get on the train north
by ten after five. Punch in by 5:30. I
learned how long a morning can be. If
you’re at work at 5:30 A.M., five hours go
by and it is 10:30 in the morning. (I didn’t
experience that again until I had a newborn baby. It does make you feel like an asshat for all those college years when you
slept until 12:45.) At my lunch break, I’d
buy a sandwich from the machine in our
vendeteria. Apparently it used to be a real
cafeteria with



“the greatest fries,” but then someone decided that wasn’t quite sad enough and it
was grim-ovated into a room full of vending machines.
On Fridays I might treat myself to a greasy
slice of pizza and onion rings at Giggio’s
down the street. I’d try not to think about
the fact that my seven-dollar meal was basically an hour’s wages. On my way back
and forth I might encounter Gregory.
Gregory was a fixture around Evanston,
well-known for stopping anyone on the
street and telling them his story, which
went like this: “Hello, my name is Gregory.
I used to be an accountant. I had a lovely
wife and family. I had a big house. One day
I had to go to the store, but my wife had
the car. I took my bike, but I didn’t wear a
helmet. I got hit by a truck. I suffered a
head injury. I still have difficulty walking. I
lost everything. My wife left me. I lost my



job. So when you ride your bike, think of
me and always wear a helmet.” His injury
had also destroyed his short-term memory,
so he would tell you his story every time he
met you.
When Gregory wasn’t walking around town
telling this story, he was coming to the Y
for his daily swim. I met him every day for
several months.
The people who worked upstairs in the offices would breeze by the front desk to pick
up their messages. Returning from their
hourlong lunches in restaurants, going to
the bathroom whenever they wanted, the
office people had it made. A guy in boxer
shorts never screamed at them that the
resident lounge TV was broken. They never
got reprimanded for peeling an orange
while working. Our only power over them
was that we had to “buzz them in” to the



front desk area, and sometimes Donna and
I would buzz it too short so they’d push on
the door and it was already locked again.
The small joys.
The guy in charge of the residence was a
big doughy bald guy whose last name had
more consonants in it than I have in this
book. I always thought he had the hardest
job. He had to deal with all of these gentlemen and whatever their complicated, depressing backstories were. He seemed to
have a lot of compassion, but he also had
to be tough and kick people out sometimes.
Unlike the women who ran the fitness program or the child care program, he experienced zero point zero fun in his day-to-day
work. Even at Christmas, when other departments were doing crafts with kids or
having Secret Santa with their coworkers,
Mr. Mczrkskczk had to organize a holiday



dinner in the basement for all the men who
had nowhere to go.
When I took the job at the front desk in
early November, I had stipulated that I had
to have off a few days around Christmas
because I had already booked a flight home
to see my family. This being my first
Christmas after college, I was used to having a month off over the holidays, and cutting that down to a three-day weekend
already had me weepy and depressed. I’m
sure that I in some way screwed Donna
over by doing this, and she probably ranted
and raved to her husband, “Gotta work
Christmas.
Stop.”
The twenty-third came. I punched my time
card and headed out, excited to see my
family and enjoy some middle-class



comforts. On my way out of the building, I
passed the Men’s Residence Christmas
Dinner. If you’ve ever witnessed a school
bus accident or a dog trying to nudge its
dead owner back to life, then the sight of
this dinner probably wouldn’t affect you.
But for me, it was easily the third-saddest
thing I’ve ever seen in my life.
The residents were at a long table in the
basement, and Mr. Mkvcrkvckz was wearing a Santa hat with his dingy suit. There
had been some kind of turkey dinner, because the place smelled like gravy, and
they were just opening their presents. A
tall goony kid named Timmy held up a pair
of tube socks.
There were tube socks for Mr. Engler.
Opening tube socks over here, boss! They
all got tube socks. It wasn’t the tube socks
that got me. It wasn’t knowing that these



guys would get nothing else for Christmas.
It was the thought of Mr. Mvzkrskchs at
the dollar store buying forty pairs of tube
socks that set me weeping all the way
home. This was compounded by the fact
that Whitney Houston’s cover of “I Will Always Love You” was constantly on my FM
Walkman radio around that time. I think
that made me cry because I associated it
with absolutely no one.
After a visit to civilization with my family, I
found the front desk harder to take.
There was a rich old guy named John Donnelly who must have donated a bunch of
money. He had forgotten his member card
one day, and when I tried to explain that it
was a four-dollar fee to enter without a
card, he went batshit. “Don’t you know
who I am, goddammit?” I had never seen
him before.



“Do you know who I am?” I wanted to say.
“Then how could I know who you are? We
don’t know each other.” My boss pulled me
aside and told me to just give him whatever
he wanted no matter how much of a prick
he was. I found he usually wanted a free
guest pass for whoever was with him instead of paying the six bucks. This chiseling behavior helped me realize that most
gym fees are a scam and only suckers pay
them. I found myself pocketing the
occasional guest-pass money and treating
myself to some Giggio’s. What was happening to my moral compass?
One day sweet goony Timmy came down to
the lobby with a dark look in his eyes. He
was pacing the lobby, ignoring us. “Heeth
off his medth!” Joe Daffy-Ducked from the
mail room when he saw him. “Heeth off his
medth!” Joe’s Daffy Duckism spread into
his body as he flitted around in a panic. By



the time I figured out that Joe was saying
“He’s off his meds,” as in “off his medication,” it was too late.
Sweet Timmy had rushed up to a young
mom in Lycra workout pants and blurted,
“I wanna squirt it in your mouth.” Poor
Tim, he was in big trouble. Mr. Mrkkkzzz
had to be called in early. The young mother
was beside herself. That’s the kind of
trouble you get when diverse groups of
people actually cross paths with one another. That’s why many of the worst things in
the world happen in and around Starbucks
bathrooms.
I started to see a pattern at the Young
Men’s Christian Association. It was a
power pyramid. At the bottom were all
these disenfranchised residents who had to
be taken care of like children, above them
were a middle class of women who did all



the work and kept the place running, and
above them were two or three of the leastuseful men you ever met. There was our
comptroller, Lonny, who never once
entered a room without saying, “Are we
having fun yet?” He never went anywhere
without food on his face. And his exit line
was always “There’s a million stories in the
naked city.” There was the program director, who talked exclusively in nonsense
business language: “We are attempting to
pro-activate the community by utilizing a
series of directives intended to maximate
communicative agreeance.” At the very top
of the pyramid was Executive Director Rick
Chang, who had no idea who anyone was
or what anyone did. He’s the one who reprimanded me for peeling an orange at the
front desk.
I heard from Donna that an office job was
opening up in the office. “Vicky’s



assistant’s going back to school. Stop.
Think I’m gonna go for it. Stop.” I was
happy for Donna. Getting a job in the office
would literally change her life.
I continued to be strung along by Eli No
Shoulders—which is what he’d be called if
this were a Native American folktale. He
now claimed to have broken up with his
girlfriend. I sat through a lot of Hal Hartley
movies. He described his plans for a oneman show about Charlie Chaplin. Nothing
came of any of it.
By the end of January, I had started taking
improv classes at night. I was making new
friends, actual friends who were not from
planet Grim. But the classes cost money,
and my 4:40 A.M. wake-up was getting
harder and harder. One February morning
was so cold that they closed school. There
wasn’t any snow; they just closed school



because they didn’t want kids dropping
dead at the bus stop. I waited for the train
at 5:10 A.M. wrapped in multiple hats and
scarves so that only my eyes were exposed.
By the time I got to Evanston, all the blood
vessels around my eyes had burst from the
temperature. I ran into Gregory. He told
me his story and I assured him that I always wore a bike helmet. When I finally
punched in, one of my coworkers at the
front desk was giggling about something.
He told me that Daffy Duck Joe was telling
people that he and I were “doing it.” That’s
what I got for engaging in simple pleasantries? A sixty-year-old hobo jerking it to me
upstairs? Before I could get too worked up,
Gregory was now at the front desk. As I
swiped his membership card, he introduced himself to me, told me his story, and
suggested I wear a bike helmet. Rising to
an Irish boil behind Gregory was John
Donnelly, who could not be kept waiting.



“Take my card. Do you know who I am
goddammit?”
Enough was enough. I was going to have to
steal that office job from Donna. And that’s
where my college education finally gave me
the unfair advantage I’d been waiting for. I
wore jeans to my interview with Vicky. It
was easy. Did I have basic computer skills?
Sure, I was twenty-two. Did I have a good
temperament on the phone? Sure. What
were my career goals? “Do this job to pay
for improv classes.” Good enough. I went
back downstairs to relieve Donna on the
phones. “You’re up,” I told her.
As I watched her nervously trundle up the
steps to her interview, I knew it was no
contest. Poor Donna had been at the front
desk too long. You could smell other
people’s grimness on her, like my roommate’s BO wafting out of the blue suit.



Donna would have thrown herself into that
office job with deep commitment for the
rest of her life. I stayed less than a year and
bailed when I got a job with The Second
City Touring Company.
That makes me sound like a jerk, I know.
But remember the beginning of the story
where I was the underdog? No? Me
neither.
The Windy City, Full of Meat
The most fun job I ever had was working at
a theater in Chicago called The Second
City. If you’ve never heard of The Second
City, it is an improvisation and sketch
comedy theater in Chicago, founded in
1959 by some University of Chicago brainiacs. There’s a Second City theater in Chicago and one in Toronto, and between the
two they have turned out some mind-



blowing alumni, including John Belushi,
Gilda Radner, Dan Aykroyd, Chris Farley,
John Candy, Catherine O’Hara, Eugene
Levy, Andrea Martin, Steve Carell, Amy
Sedaris, Amy Poehler, and Stephen Colbert. I could go on, but my editor told me
that was a cheap way to flesh out the book.
I moved to Chicago in 1992 to study improv and it was everything I wanted it to
be. It was like a cult. People ate, slept, and
definitely drank improv. They worked at
crappy day jobs just to hand over their
money for improv classes. Eager young
people in khakis and polo shirts were willing to do whatever teachers like Del Close
and Martin de Maat told them to. In retrospect, it may actually have been a cult.
I had studied legit acting methods in college—Stanislavsky, Meisner, Cicely Berry’s
The Actor and His Text—but any TV critic



will tell you that I never mastered any of
them. Improvisation as a way of working
made sense to me. I love the idea of two
actors on stage with nothing—no costumes,
no sets, no dialogue—who make up
something together that is then completely
real to everyone in the room.
The rules of improvisation appealed to me
not only as a way of creating comedy, but
as a worldview.
Studying improvisation literally changed
my life. It set me on a career path toward
Saturday Night Live. It changed the way I
look at the world, and it’s where I met my
husband. What has your cult done for you
lately?
When I first started working at The Second
City, there were two resident companies
and three touring companies. The resident



companies would write and perform original sketch comedy shows for packed
houses in Chicago. The touring companies
would take the best pieces from these
shows and perform them in church basements and community centers around the
country. We traveled by van to all kinds of
destinations, from upstate New York to St.
Paul, Minnesota, to Waco, Texas.
In the touring company we were paid
seventy-five dollars per show and a twentyfive-dollar per diem. Of course, sometimes
you’d have a show in Kansas followed by a
show in Texas followed by another show in
Kansas, so you’d have to ride in the van for
two days to get to your seventy-five-dollar
gig. It wasn’t lucrative, but it was show
business!
There were three touring companies: Red
Company, Green Company, and Blue



Company. I was in the Blue Company, or
BlueCo as we called it to be unbelievably
cool. I still feel affection for the members
of BlueCo like we served in the military together. Specifically the French military, because we were lazy and a little bit sneaky.
For example, they once sent us on a tour of
Texas and the Midwest, and the moment
the van pulled away from the theater, we
all agreed to throw out the “best of”
sketches we had been directed to perform
and replace them with our own original
material. Amy Poehler in particular was
tired of being handed dated old blond-girl
roles where all her lines were things like
“Here’s your coffee, honey,” or “Mr. Johnson will see you now,” or “Whattaya mean
a blind date?!”
Each night we’d pull out an old sketch and
replace it with something of our own. My



friend Ali Farahnakian, who is a genius in
many ways, wrote a very funny monologue
about the McDonald’s Big Mac. During the
course of the monologue he would eat an
entire Big Mac Extra Value Meal onstage.
Because the meal was technically a prop,
he made the stage manager buy it for him
every night and he kept his twenty-five dollars. These were the kinds of skills you
learned touring for The Second City. By the
time we returned to Chicago ten days later,
the “best of” show was completely gone
and we were in big trouble, except we
didn’t really care.
The Rules of Improvisation That
Will Change Your Life and Reduce
Belly
Fat*



The first rule of improvisation is AGREE.
Always agree and SAY YES. When you’re
improvising, this means you are required
to agree with whatever your partner has
created. So if we’re improvising and I say,
“Freeze, I have a gun,” and you say,
“That’s not a gun. It’s your finger. You’re
pointing your finger at me,” our improvised scene has ground to a halt. But if I
say, “Freeze, I have a gun!” and you say,
“The gun I gave you for Christmas! You
bastard!” then we have started a scene because we have AGREED that my finger is
in fact a Christmas gun.
Now, obviously in real life you’re not always going to agree with everything
everyone says. But the Rule of Agreement
reminds you to “respect what your partner has created” and to at least start from



an open-minded place. Start with a YES
and see where that takes you.
As an improviser, I always find it jarring
when I meet someone in real life whose
first answer is no. “No, we can’t do that.”
“No, that’s not in the budget.” “No, I will
not hold your hand for a dollar.”
What kind of way is that to live?
The second rule of improvisation is not
only to say yes, but YES, AND. You are
supposed to agree and then add something
of your own. If I start a scene with “I can’t
believe it’s so hot in here,” and you just
say, “Yeah…” we’re kind of at a standstill.
But if I say, “I can’t believe it’s so hot in
here,” and you say,
“What did you expect? We’re in hell.” Or if
I say, “I can’t believe it’s so hot in here,”



and you say, “Yes, this can’t be good for
the wax figures.” Or if I say, “I can’t believe it’s so hot in here,” and you say, “I
told you we shouldn’t have crawled into
this dog’s mouth,” now we’re getting
somewhere.
To me YES, AND means don’t be afraid to
contribute. It’s your responsibility to contribute. Always make sure you’re adding
something to the discussion. Your initiations are worthwhile.
The next rule is MAKE STATEMENTS.
This is a positive way of saying “Don’t ask
questions all the time.” If we’re in a scene
and I say, “Who are you? Where are we?
What are we doing here? What’s in that
box?” I’m putting pressure on you to come
up with all the answers.



In other words: Whatever the problem, be
part of the solution. Don’t just sit around
raising questions and pointing out
obstacles. We’ve all worked with that person. That person is a drag. It’s usually the
same person around the office who says
things like “There’s no calories in it if you
eat it standing up!” and “I felt menaced
when Terry raised her voice.”
MAKE STATEMENTS also applies to us
women: Speak in statements instead of
apologetic questions. No one wants to go
to a doctor who says, “I’m going to be
your surgeon? I’m here to talk to you
about your procedure? I was first in my
class at Johns Hopkins, so?” Make statements, with your actions and your voice.
Instead of saying “Where are we?” make a
statement like “Here we are in Spain,
Dracula.” Okay,



“Here we are in Spain, Dracula” may
seem like a terrible start to a scene, but
this leads us to the best rule:
THERE ARE NO MISTAKES, only opportunities. If I start a scene as what I
think is very clearly a cop riding a bicycle,
but you think I am a hamster in a hamster
wheel, guess what? Now I’m a hamster in
a hamster wheel. I’m not going to stop
everything to explain that it was really
supposed to be a bike.
Who knows? Maybe I’ll end up being a police hamster who’s been put on “hamster
wheel” duty because I’m “too much of a
loose cannon” in the field. In improv there
are no mistakes, only beautiful happy accidents. And many of the world’s greatest
discoveries have been by accident. I mean,
look at the Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup, or
Botox.



Bossypants Lesson #183: You Can’t
Boss People Around If They Don’t
Really Care
The producers tried to punish BlueCo by
giving us the worst gigs. Prom shows were
held at one A.M. after a high school prom,
and attendance was mandatory. It was basically a way to keep kids from drinking or
having sex on prom night, and the performers hated doing these shows almost as
much as the kids hated watching them.
Imagine how mad you would be if you were
missing out on a toothy knob job to watch
some cult members make up a song about
the 1996 election.
There were other terrible shows. Brightly
lit hotel ballrooms with broken microphones. College shows where the kids were



all drunk. Charity buyouts where the audience was very, very sober.
Corporate gigs at eight A.M. for employees
who were there to be told about reductions
in their health care benefits. Basically, any
time you were performing for an audience
that was not there voluntarily, it was a
rough show.
After seven or eight months of touring, we
started to wonder which of us actors would
get promoted to one of the main companies. The Mainstage cast and the “Second
City e.t.c.” cast got to stay in Chicago and
earn a unionized living wage. They would
develop their own sketches by improvising
in front of an audience, then keeping the
ideas that had worked until they had a full
two-hour show. It was the dream job.
However, of all the places I’ve worked that
were supposedly boys’ clubs, The Second



City was the only one where I experienced
institutionalized gender nonsense. For example, a director of one of the main companies once justified cutting a scene by
saying, “The audience doesn’t want to see a
scene between two women.” Whaaa? More
on that later.
In 1995, each cast at The Second City was
made up of four men and two women.
When it was suggested that they switch one
of the companies to three men and three
women, the producers and directors had
the same panicked reaction. “You can’t do
that. There won’t be enough parts to go
around. There won’t be enough for the
girls.” This made no sense to me, probably
because I speak English and have never
had a head injury. We weren’t doing Death
of a Salesman. We were making up the
show ourselves. How could there not be
enough parts? Where was the “Yes, and”?



If everyone had something to contribute,
there would be enough. The insulting implication, of course, was that the women
wouldn’t have any ideas.
I’m happy to say the producers did jump
into the twentieth century and switch to a
cast of
“three and three,” and I got to be that third
woman in the first gender-equal cast.
However, I must say, as a point of pride,
that I didn’t get the job because I was a
woman. I got the job because Amy Poehler
had moved to New York with the Upright
Citizens Brigade and I was the next best
thing.



But this was the first time I experienced
what I like to call “The Myth of Not
Enough.”
When I worked at Saturday Night Live, I
had a five A.M. argument with one of our
most intelligent actresses. It was rumored
that Lorne was adding another woman to
the cast, and she was irate. (In fairness, she
was also exhausted. It was five A.M. after
writing all night.) She felt there wouldn’t
be enough for the girls and that this girl
was too similar to her. There wouldn’t be
enough screen time to go around.



I revived my old argument: How could this
be true if we made up the show? A bunch
of us suggested that they collaborate instead of compete. And, of course, that’s
what they did, with great success, once
they were actually in a room together. But
where does that initial panic come from?
This is what I tell young women who ask
me for career advice. People are going to
try to trick you. To make you feel that you
are in competition with one another.
“You’re up for a promotion. If they go with
a woman, it’ll be between you and Barbara.” Don’t be fooled. You’re not in competition with other women. You’re in competition with everyone.
Also, I encourage them to always wear a
bra. Even if you don’t think you need it,
just… you know what? You’re never going
to regret it.



My dream for the future is that sketch
comedy shows become a gender-blind
meritocracy of whoever is really the funniest. You might see four women and two
men. You might see five men and a
YouTube video of a kitten sneezing. Once
we know we’re really open to all the options, we can proceed with Whatever’s the
Funniest… which will probably involve
farts.
My Honeymoon, or A Supposedly
Fun Thing I’ll Never Do Again
Either*
My husband doesn’t like to fly. He does fly
now because he doesn’t want our daughter
to grow up thinking he is a Don Knotts
character. But when we were first married,
he didn’t fly.



I made him fly once before we were married because he was offered a free trip to
Vienna, Austria, to direct a sketch comedy
show for an English-language theater. If
you know anything about Vienna, you
know that they love Chicago-style sketch
comedy!*
Anyway, not knowing then the depth of his
fear, I bullied him into taking the free trip
to Austria, assuring him that I would be
with him all the way and talk him through
the flight. To get to Vienna from Chicago,
you fly to Zurich, drop through the bumpy
air pockets around the Alps, land, and then
take off again. This is the worst thing for
fearful flyers because they all cling to that
same fact nugget like Rainman: “Most
planes crash during takeoff and landing!”
We were doing twice as much taking off
and landing as he had agreed to. This was
unacceptable. He was miserable the entire



week we were there, distracted by worry
about the trip home.
I swore I would never make him fly again.
Just years later, we get married. Marriage
leads to a honeymoon, which traditionally
involves travel.
For our honeymoon, we book a cruise to
Bermuda because the ship leaves from
New York. (We don’t have to fly to Miami
to get on it.) We board the ship from a giant hangar on the West Side of Manhattan.
There are guys playing steel drums and
handing you drinks. They don’t ask if you
are a recovering alcoholic or if you are on
any medications that might interact negatively with alcohol. This is maritime law!
You get a drink without asking. After a
brief “muster drill” where no one pays attention to where their lifeboat station is,



the fun begins. And the first few days are
pretty fun.
We have a little room with a balcony. The
couple next door has a balcony about ten
inches away. They don’t introduce themselves, but they are comically drunk most
of the time and the wife wears a spangly
American-flag bikini, leading me to believe
she is a retired stripper.
There’s a pool, kind of. It’s more like a big
sloshing kiddie pool, and if you get in it,
you feel like you are taking a bath with
strangers.
There are some wonderful Filipinos who
fold your towels in the shape of a different
animal every night. It might be an elephant
wearing your sunglasses, or a duck wearing
your sunglasses. It’s just fun. Don’t
overthink it.



There are fun activities hosted by our
cruise director, who calls himself “Dan Dan
the Party Man.” He has recently replaced
the previous cruise director, “Pete Pete the
Party Meat,” who replaced
“Guy Guy the Funtimes Person,” who had
recently died of autoerotic asphyxiation.
No, that part’s not true! That’s a joke-lie.
I’m not going to lie to you in this story because I want you to know that the rest of it
is true.
Dan Dan the Party Man leads poolside
games that include: People pretending to
be horses in a steeple chase. A dance contest. Something with beach balls.
At mealtimes we sit at an assigned table.
The other two couples at our table are
middle-aged in-laws from the Delaware
Water Gap. Richard and Barbra, Betty and



Bernie. We talk about dog breeds and fishing; my knowledge of both topics is equal.
We agree that the ship’s food is as good as
any restaurant in New York (between 48th
and 50th Street on Seventh Avenue). Betty
and Bernie say they wanted to take this trip
as a do-over of their honeymoon. Apparently, they had honeymooned in Bermuda
thirty-five years ago and the whole trip had
been a disaster because Betty broke her
arm falling off a scooter. “Never rent a
scooter in Bermuda,” Bernie says. Betty
overlaps him, “They always tell you on
these cruises, don’t rent a scooter when
you get to Bermuda. You’re not used to it.
You’ll have an accident. But people don’t
listen.” We all agree; people just don’t
listen.
While our little six-top gets along fine, we
are all silently jealous of nearby table
twenty, a mix of young couples and stray



gays who are hitting it off big-time. Every
lull in our discussion of “German shepherds we have known” is filled with a boisterous drunken laugh from table twenty.
It is worth noting that at this time, I had
been doing Weekend Update on Saturday
Night Live for two full seasons. I am not
recognized by anyone. Well, I am recognized by the guy who refills the soft-serve
ice cream machine by the pool, but not for
being on TV, just for lingering. For O! The
desserts!
Rows and rows of pastries laid out
cafeteria-style. Some of them are unidentifiable squares of pink stuff.
I think we called it junket back in the seventies. They don’t taste good; but like a
schoolboy at his first coed dance, I am



drawn not so much by their beauty as by
their unlimited quantities.
On day three I am very excited to attend
one of our special excursions for which you
pay extra.
We are going to get off the boat early in the
morning in Bermuda, where we will be given bicycles. We will ride our bikes around
the island with a guide to a special secluded beach where we can swim and have
rum swizzles and then we will be taken
back to the ship by a party boat. Sounds
pretty good, right?
That’s what I thought, too. I wouldn’t shut
up about it. For weeks before we left I
bragged about how I had chosen the best
excursion. It was fun and fitness combined! It was a great way to see the island!
My husband and I wait at the designated



pickup point at 8:30 A.M. No one else
shows up. A quick check of our itinerary
reveals the heartbreaking truth. The bike
trip was yesterday. In my excitement, I
memorized it wrong. I cry. I cry like a three
year old who just wants to take her toy
cash register into the bathtub. I cry in a
way that reveals that I’m not finding the
rest of the cruise that fun.
This is definitely the low point of the trip,
until the fire. Oh yes, there’s a ship fire
coming in this story. Wait for it.
Once my fitness-and-fun dreams are
dashed, I start to lean hard into the food.
Soft serve, hot dog time at the pool, a
nightly aperitif called the Chocolate Mudslide, which is basically a twenty-ounce
chocolate shake with a thimble of Bailey’s
in it.



The last night of the cruise is formal night.
My husband, who for legal reasons I will
call Barry, is wearing a suit that he had
custom-made for him by a Portuguese tailor in Pennsylvania. I am wearing a dress
that was foisted on me by some aggressive
Russian salespeople on the Upper West
Side of Manhattan. Needless to say, we are
feeling very continental. Photographers
come to the tables and take formal photos
of us all, as well as novelty photos of us being menaced tableside by a woman dressed
as a pirate. During dinner there is a passenger talent show. And sure enough, the
little gay from table twenty does a tap
dance, cheered on by his new best friends.
Those assholes.
After dinner we settle into the ship’s
thousand-seat theater to enjoy the eleven
P.M.



performance of Fiesta Caliente. The house
is packed for this musical dance celebration of Latin pop music. One of the dancers
is “warming up” on stage as part of the
preshow, a theatrical convention that my
husband and I can appreciate because
we’re from New York and know about
things. My Chocolate Mudslide is going
down smooth when we hear the three bells.
Bing. Bing. Bing. But instead of Dan Dan
the Party Man, it’s a woman’s voice and
she’s breathing heavily. She sounds Filipina, if that’s even a thing. “Bravo… Bravo…
Bravo,” she pants. “Main engine. Starboard
side. Bravo… Bravo… Bravo.” We hear the
speaker shut off. People look around a little
nervously. The dancer warming up on
stage makes a beeline for backstage. Within seconds the three bells are back. Oh,
thank God, it’s our Greek captain.



“Laydis and gentlemen, thissis your captain spicking. Pliss proceed to your muster
stations.” This is not what I wanted him to
say. We get up and make our way painfully
slowly through the completely full theater.
Everyone is quiet. Which is the
wooooooorst. It’s scary when a group of
people all know instinctively not to joke
around. Another voice comes over the PA,
repeating, “Please, remain calm.
Please proceed to your muster stations.”
The German half of me is thinking, “Shove
the old people out of the way. Shove the
old and the infirm! If they are strong
enough to resist you, they deserve to live.”
The Greek half of me wants to scream at
our Greek captain. I do neither and proceed obediently.



We stop at our cabin along the way so that
I can change into sneakers. I have a strong
urge to lie down and pretend this is not
happening—like the old couple in Titanic.
That’s how I want to go, ice-cold water
rising around our spooning bodies and me
somehow successfully willing my body to
nap. I tie my Sauconys.* “We should
hurry,” Jeff says quietly. (Damn it, I promised myself I wouldn’t use his real name!)
We head to our muster station, grateful
that we went to the drill. Women and children are put to the front, men in the back.
They really still do that. I hold Jeff’s hand
diagonally through the crowd.
We’re going to be one of those stories of a
couple that died on their honeymoon. We’ll
be on the local news. They’ll identify Jeff
by the monogram inside that suit jacket. I
think about how horrible it will be if I have
to get on the lifeboat and leave him behind.



Another announcement. “This is Dan your
cruise director. We have a fire in the engine room due to a burst fuel pipe. Our
crew is working hard to put the fire out,
and I will update you as I have more
information.” Uh-oh. Where’s Dan Dan the
Party Man?
I look around. There are several tween-age
girls, in tears, girls who have no doubt
watched Titanic more times than you have
looked at your own stools. There are littler
kids who are laughing, unaware. There are
the dopes who broke their arms and ankles
on scooters (people really don’t listen),
who are now wondering if it will cost them
their lives. The wildly drunk man from the
cabin next door to ours is in front of me in
the crowd. He’s so drunk that he’s standing
in the women-and-children section.



He complains loudly that this is boring and
that we are a bunch of assholes. When a
clearly terrified woman blurts out, “Please,
sir, be quiet,” he sways for a second and
then lets out a long “Shuuuuut uuuuuuup”
that is funny not just because of its Jackie
Gleason–style delivery but also because of
its inappropriateness in a situation where
we’re all probably going to die.
About thirty minutes later, Dan Dan the
Death Man comes back on, saying that
thanks to the excellent work of the firefighters on the crew, the fire is out. We will
be able to return to our cabins as soon as
the rest of the ship has been checked. He
says the heat from the fire set off every fire
alarm on the ship and so every chamber
must be checked before we can go back inside. Most people take this as good news.
But I’m too smart for that. I know that extreme heat plus a burst fuel pipe means



that the ship is going to explode now.
While people around me start to relax, I
keep my eyes on the sea, waiting to be
rocketed into it on a wave of fire. I’ll be
ready for it to happen and that way it won’t
happen. It’s a burden, being able to control
situations with my hyper-vigilance, but it’s
my lot in life.
Some crew members come around with
coolers of cold drinks. A nearby woman
takes a soda and hands it back, saying, “Do
you have diet?” If God had a sense of humor, the ship would have exploded right
then. (Actually, I think God does have a
sense of humor, as evidenced by squirrels
eating pizza with their hands and that
thing where suicide bombers accidentally
detonate before they get to their destination.) The ship doesn’t explode.



After an hour or so, we’re allowed into the
lounge and they give out playing cards.
People are sleeping on the floor. It’s very
Poseidon Adventure. It’s almost three A.M.
when we return to our cabin.
Our sunglasses are just sitting there on the
bed; whatever towel animal was wearing
them has fled in terror.
We sleep in our clothes. In the morning,
my husband, who for legal reasons I will
now call Lee, wakes me up and says that
we have turned back to Bermuda. This is
one of the things I love about Lee, that he
is manly and old-fashioned enough to
know that the sun should be on our right if
we’re headed north. They must be taking
us back to Bermuda and flying us home.
Lee’s face shrinks with worry. I think about
our tablemates who had mentioned they
also didn’t like to fly. Most of the people on



this ship are afraid to fly. My God: That’s
why they’re here. Cruising itself is not actually fun! I spring into action.
There must be a finite amount of anti-anxiety medication on this ship. While most
people are still asleep, I find the infirmary
and procure two pills for my husband. One
for when the plane takes off and one for
when I tell him he’s right, we’re being sent
home on a plane.
After handing the first pill to my husband,
Rod (Jeff’s complaining that Lee sounds
too feminine.
Dammit, I used his real name again!), I
head to the business center and make a
forty-dollar ship-to-shore call to let my
parents know that in spite of what they
have seen on the news, we’re okay. I am



surprised to learn that this was not a news
story.
The crew tries to downplay the seriousness
of the night before. The “midnight cooking
demonstration,” cancelled last night, is
now being held in the hot sunlight. The
guys are back playing the steel drums by
the pool bar, but now the music seems
creepy, like when children sing in a horror
movie or when guys play steel drums on a
cruise ship that almost sank. The crew is
glum. The scuttlebutt (which actually is
scuttlebutt and not gossip, because we’re
on a ship) is that the ship is being taken
back to Bermuda, where it will be drydocked and repaired for six months. No
wonder they’re a little halfhearted about
the cooking demonstration; they’re all out
of a job.



I buy our formal-night picture from the
photo center. That I actually pay for it, instead of just taking it after all this nonsense, is a credit to my parents. Rod and I
are looking tan and grinning at the lady
pirate between us. What amount of revisionism will be necessary for this photo to
be an accurate memento of our trip?
I run into Betty, Bernie, Barbra, and
Richard in the cafeteria. Betty and Bernie
have officially given up on Bermuda.
Richard is ashen. I can tell he is the one
who’s terrified to fly. “Did you get some
pills?” I ask. “They were out,” his wife
answers.
As the ship pulls back into King’s Wharf,
local women and children are cheering us
in. Little topless boys are waving their Tshirts in the air. Nothing gives you a fear



flashback like a bunch of strangers cheering in surprise that you’re not dead.
They put us on a chartered flight back to
New York. If you’ve never been on a
chartered flight full of people who are
afraid to fly who have also been traumatized in the past twelve hours, I recommend
it more than a cruise. It’s pretty funny.
Everyone is jittery, and when the pilot
makes the unfortunate choice of testing the
PA system by saying, “Bravo, bravo,” you
can almost hear people’s b-holes tighten. A
collective cartoon-mouse squeak of b-hole.
What if I told you now that the plane
crashed while taxiing on the runway? It
didn’t. We made it home, shaken but tan.
The most interesting thing I learned from
this trip came when I told the story to my
friend James, who had been a performer



on a cruise ship years before. When I told
him the woman said,
“Bravo, bravo, bravo,” James froze. Did she
really say it three times? he needed to
know. Then James laid it out for me. Bravo
is serious. The more times they say it, the
more serious it is. The most times they
ever say it is four times, and if they say it
four times, it means you’re going down to
your watery grave. So “Bravo, bravo,
bravo” was not terrific. Interesting fact
number two: In the event of an emergency,
it is the entertainers who are in charge of
the lifeboats. Because the rest of the crew
has actual nautical duties, the kids from Fiesta Caliente are trained to man the lifeboats. If you ever have to get on a lifeboat,
the person in charge of your safety will
likely be a nineteen-year-old dancer from
Tampa who just had a fight with his boyfriend about the new Rihanna video. James



also told me that each lifeboat has a gun on
it and that once a lifeboat is in the water,
the performer–lifeboat captain is trained
to shoot anyone who is disruptive. This is
apparently legal in accordance with maritime law.
About a week later, we get a letter of apology in the mail offering us a free cruise of
equal or lesser value as compensation this
offer is non-transferable. I’m pretty sure
the only people who took that offer were
the drunk guy next door, his stripper wife,
and those dicks from table twenty. But I
shall not cruise again. Luxury cruises were
designed to make something unbearable—a two-week transatlantic crossing—seem bearable. There’s no need to do
it now. There are planes. You wouldn’t take
a vacation where you ride on a stagecoach
for two months but there’s all-you-can-eat
shrimp. You wouldn’t take a vacation



where you have an old-timey appendectomy without anesthesia while steel drums
play. You might take a vacation where you
ride on a camel for two days if they gave
you those animal towels wearing your
sunglasses.
“What were you thinking when we were
holding hands diagonally?” I ask. Jeff says,
“I was thinking, ‘It’s going to be so hard for
her when she chooses not to get on that
lifeboat and stay with me.’
”
I decide I can’t start this marriage with a
lie.
“Really?” I say. “ ’Cause I was thinking that
it was going to be so hard for you when I
got on the lifeboat and you had to stay behind.” He is appalled. I plead my case.



“Remember when we saw Titanic how mad
I was at Kate Winslet when she climbed
out of the lifeboat and back onto the ship?
I think she encumbered Leonardo
DiCaprio. If she had gone on the lifeboat,
then he could have had that piece of wood
she was floating on and they both would
have survived. I would never do that to
you.”
I wait for his response, hoping that in the
twenty-first century romantic love can be
defined as not lying about your plans to get
on the lifeboat and remembering to get
your partner some pills. He just laughs.
With that settled, we begin our married
life.
The Secrets of Mommy’s Beauty
I know why you bought this book. Or
should I say, I know why you borrowed this



book from that woman at your office. You
want to know my secret beauty regimen. I
learned early on that a woman must master and protect the “Secrets of Her Beauty,”
but I will share with you my Twelve Tenets
of Looking Amazing Forever.
1) Form Good Beauty Habits Early
“How do you stay so eternally youthful?”
“Your skin is so flawless. What’s your
secret?” people always ask Sharon Stone.
Like my peer Sharon Stone, I have always
felt that the simplest products are the best.
Sharon credits her good skin to Pond’s cold
cream (and maybe a little bit of nature’s
own botulism. Wink!). In my youth I
washed daily with Ivory soap and Prell
shampoo. Everyone knew Prell was the
best shampoo because you could also use it
to clean a frying pan. I then dried my hair
with a Hot Comb. The Hot Comb was a



small vibrating, wheezing hairbrush that
for some reason my family kept in the dining room credenza. Maybe it wanted to be
close to the electric knife, since they were
almost the exact same machine.
If I didn’t have the time for the full hotcomb treatment—for example, if I was in a
hurry to get outside and choreograph a
pretend Pepsi commercial with my friend
Maureen—I would stand in front of our giant air conditioner and let it blast my hair
dry.
2) The Right Undergarments Are an
Essential Part of Your Silhouette
I developed breasts very early, around nine
years old. I developed breasts so weird and
high, it’s possible they were above my collarbone. At that point, wearing a bra was



not so much about holding the breasts up,
as clarifying that they were not a goiter.
My mother knew the importance of getting
the right fit for a bra, so she took me to
JCPenney and tried one on over my
clothes. She tried a bra on me over my
clothes in the middle of JCPenney. I thank
her for this. This early breast-related humiliation prevented me from ever needing to
participate in “Girls Gone Wild” in my
twenties.
3) Skin Care, Skin Care, Skin Care!
Makeup companies like to make skin care
seem complicated, but let me demystify it
for you.
The Three Secrets of Great Skin are Moisture, SOOTS (Stay Out of the Sun), and Be
Italian. The Three Rules of SOOTS are



Sunscreen, AWAH (Always Wear a Hat),
and DLO (Don’t Lay Out). “Don’t Lay Out”
is a mnemonic device for “Do Lots of
Omega 3s,” which can be found in SWaWB
(Salmon, Walnuts, and Weird Bread).
Consistency is the most important part of
skin care, followed by Water Drinking, and
both of those are less important than
SLEEP (Sleep Like Everyone Else, Please).
At the tender age of fourteen I was already
invigorating my skin with a rigorous daily
massage. I squeezed and picked at every
pore, harvesting any and all goo balls. This,
followed by a bracing splash of Sea Breeze,
has helped keep my pores large and supple
to this day.
By nineteen, I had discovered that Retin-A
was a great way to have large chunks of



your skin peel off and waft to the floor during acting class.
4) Don’t Be Afraid to Try “Outside
the Box” Skin Care Solutions
I spent most of 1990 bargaining with God
that I would take one gigantic lifelong back
zit in exchange for clear skin on my face.
While this never worked out, I do not at all
regret the time I spent pursuing it. It’s
about the journey, people.
5) The Eyes Are the Windows to
Where the Soul Is Supposed to Be
I taught Monica Lewinsky everything she
knows… about eye cream. I guess I should
back up and explain that. In the spring of
1999, I participated in a secret meeting
with Monica Lewinsky, SNL



producer Marci Klein, and fellow SNL
writer Paula Pell. Marci called and asked
how quickly Paula and I could get down to
her Tribeca apartment. Monica Lewinsky
was coming over and we three were going
to convince her to appear on SNL. This was
before Ms. Lewinsky’s infamous Barbara
Walters interview aired. None of us had
even heard her speak before. She was still
that enigmatic girl in the beret who didn’t
get to the dry cleaners very often.
We spent the afternoon drinking wine and
eating wasabi peas. (We didn’t even buy
the girl lunch! Who did we think we were,
presidents?) Monica was bright and personable and very open with us—maybe too
open for a person in her situation. I’m just
saying, Linda Tripp might not have been
the intelligence-gathering mastermind you
thought she was.



We talked about thongs, Weight Watchers,
and Brazilian bikini waxes. (But you probably knew all that when I said it was 1999.)
When the topic turned to eye cream, I
wanted to talk, so I shared the one piece of
information I’d retained from the mean
woman at the La Mer counter in Saks.
“You’re supposed to gently pat it on with
your ring finger.” I demonstrated. “Oh,
really?” Monica asked with a level of interest and gullibility that explained a lot.
To this day, I think of Monica whenever I
apply my eye cream. And I’m sure she
thinks of me.
6) Space Lasers
As you age, you may want to pay someone
to shoot lasers at your face. If you are a
fancy lady and live in a fancy urban center
like New York or Dallas–Fort Worth, you
go to a fancy dermatologist and they cover



your eyes and point various machines at
your face to “promote collagen production.” If you live far from a city, you can
simulate the experience at home by having
a friend hide your wallet while you sit close
to a space heater. It will work just as well.
For a while I was getting my “laser money
removal” done by a fancy doctor on Park
Avenue. One day I went to see about some
hormonal acne that wouldn’t go away on
my jawline. The doctor eagerly injected the
spot with steroids, and within a day or two
the blemish had shrunk down to normal.
Unfortunately, the steroids caused the spot
to keep shrinking, and by the end of the
week I had a divot in my jaw through
which I could feel the bone. I was furious
and complaining about it in the makeup
chair at SNL. “My face is already pretty
banged up and now I have another scar to



deal with?!” Amy Poehler called to me
from across the room, “The difference is…
now you’re paying for it.” She was right.
I really had made it. We high-fived about it
later.
7) “A Woman’s Hair Is Her Crowning Glory”—the guys who wrote the
Bible
Beauty experts in the 1970s declared the
shag the “most universally flattering haircut.” The short layers in the front framed
the face while irregular longer pieces in the
back elongated the neck. I think this picture proves them right.



Finding a hairstylist you trust is key. For
many years I worked exclusively with the
students at the Gordon Phillips Beauty
Academy. The sign out front said it
all—“Gordon Phillips Beauty Academy,
London, Paris, Upper Darby.” Always on
the cutting edge of beauty, I believe this
haircut was executed by folding my face in
half and cutting out a heart. Of course I
must be honest; this is clearly a professional photo taken on “picture day.” I didn’t
look this sleek and pulled together all the
time.



8) Q: But Tina, Most of Us Don’t
Have Constant Access to a Hairstylist. What Do
We Do?
A: First of All, Don’t Speak to Me in
That Tone. Second of All, You Must
Learn to Tame Your Own Mane!
I first found a system that worked for me in
the mid-eighties. Once or twice a week I
would set my alarm for six A.M. so I could
get up and plug in the Hot Stix. Hot Stix
were heated rubber sticks, and you would
twist your hair around them and roll it up.
After about fifteen minutes, you took all
the sticks out, and your hair was curled up
in tight rings (with dry raggedy ends). I
would study the curls in the mirror, impressed with both the appliance and my
newfound ability to use it.



Then, without fail, at the last second before
leaving for school, I would ask myself, “Am
I supposed to brush it out or leave it?” Why
could I never remember? That feeling of
“I’m pretty sure this next step is wrong, but
I’m just gonna do it anyway” is part of the
same set of instincts that makes me such a
great cook.
On some level I knew I wasn’t supposed to
brush it out, but I couldn’t stop myself.
My hand—gripping the brush like it was a
hand transplant from a murderer who
hated beauty!—brushed through the curls,
turning them into a giant static-filled mess.
By the end of homeroom it was pulled into
a ponytail, which really works on me, so
there you have it.



Right after I graduated high school I decided to cut my hair off. This was my
chance to reinvent myself before college.
After a harsh disagreement over the
ideational hollowness of sausage curls, my
mother and I had ended our artistic experiment with the Gordon Phillips Academy.
We were now getting our hair cut by my
classmate’s mom, who was also a professional Ann Jillian look-alike. Yes, the feeling you’re experiencing right now is jealousy. The whole family was glamorous that
way. I always envied their lives because
they seemed like they were living in a sitcom. They were all blond and good-looking. The mom cut hair out of her basement
salon and Ann Jillian–ed part-time. You
could sell this show to CBS just with that!
The dad ran a restaurant. Their uncle was
our school’s “cool” English teacher. The
oldest son was a young Bon Jovi type who



was the star of our high school choir and
went all the way to New York once a week
for private hard-rock vocal coaching. The
middle son was a brilliant, funny, cuddly
giant who drew sardonic cartoons in the
margins of things, and the baby of the family was the Jason Priestley–level adorable
kid who, clearly, the producers of the family had added in the last season to boost
ratings. I mean, just looking at this family,
you knew they were going to make it to
syndication.
It was natural that I would trust Mrs.
Doyle to transform me into my new college
self. I wanted to cut it all off. Not the coward’s move, not a bob: the full choppery.
Mrs. Doyle put my hair into a thick ponytail, cut that ponytail off, and handed it to
me. I still have it somewhere in a cardboard box in my parents’ house. I know because my mom has been politely asking me



to “maybe spend an hour going through
those boxes” for over twenty years now.
The haircut was cropped close on the sides,
fuller on top, with two long Liza Minnelli–esque wisps that hung down like peyes. I
loved it. Then I asked whether we needed
the wisps, but once it was explained to me
that they were mandatory, I went back to
loving it.
Nerd no more, this new cut let people see
the real me that was inside—a mother of
four who was somehow also a virgin.
9) When It Comes to Fashion, Find
What Works for You and Stick with
It
A wise friend once told me, “Don’t wear
what fashion designers tell you to wear.
Wear what they wear.” His point being that



most designers, no matter what they throw
onto the runway, favor simple, flattering
pieces for themselves.
Anyone who has never met me can tell you
that fashion has always been very very very
very very very very important to me. For
example, I once told my cousin that my
dream would be “if the whole store Express
was my closet!” How prescient, because
now, of course, I wear nothing but Express.
It can’t be said enough. Don’t concern
yourself with fashion; stick to simple
pieces that flatter your body type.
By nineteen, I had found my look. Oversize
T-shirts, bike shorts, and wrestling shoes.
To prevent the silhouette from being too
baggy, I would cinch it at the waist with my
fanny pack. I was pretty sure I would wear
this look forever. The shirts allowed me to



express myself with cool sayings like
“There’s No Crying in Baseball” and
“Universität Heidelberg,” the bike shorts
showed off my muscular legs, and the
fanny pack held all my trolley tokens. I was
nailing it on a daily basis. Find something
like this for yourself as soon as possible.
10) A Manicure Is a Must
Once I moved to New York in 1997, I discovered the joys of the quickie Korean
manicure. The city is filled with tiny storefront nail salons where you can get a
manicure-pedicure, an underarm wax, and
a ten-minute series of punches in the back,
all for under a hundred dollars. The first
few times you go, it can be intimidating.
For starters, you may forget that you yourself speak English. You enter, smile, and
nod at the manager. “Manicure-pedicure?”
“Pick color,” she chirps back in her Korean



accent. You pick out a couple of the three
hundred shades of off-white. “This for
manicure. This feet. Magazine okay?” Why
are you talking like that? Now that you’ve
racially embarrassed yourself, you are
ready to squeeze into a seat at a tiny table
and basically hold hands with a stranger
for twenty minutes. That really is the craziest thing the first few times you go, getting
used to passively flopping your hands into
another woman’s hands. It’s like
something they’d make you do at summer
camp as a trust-building exercise, I assume. I never went to summer camp, as I
was neither underprivileged nor Jewish
nor extremely Christian, nor obese. (It
would be a great exercise for someone who
thinks they want to move to New York. Sit
in an enclosed space full of fumes and hold
hands with a stranger for twenty minutes
while everyone around you speaks a



language you don’t understand. If you enjoy this, you will enjoy the 6 train.)
To take your mind off how weird it is to
have someone else clean your fingers, there
is a series of theatrical performances all
around you. To your right you might find a
New Yorker speaking animatedly about an
apartment she has seen. “It was sick. You
don’t even know. Marble slabs.” The more
New Yorkers like something, the more disgusted they are. “The kitchen was all SubZero: I want to kill myself. The building
has a playroom that makes you want to
break your own jaw with a golf club. I can’t
take it.” To your left may sit an older woman eating cashews with one hand while
talking on the phone with the other while
still receiving a manicure and oversharing.
“I know. I was crying about it on the toilet
this morning—*to manicurist+ don’t cut
the cuticles, please.” As you listen closer,



you will suspect that she is participating in
a paid therapy session over the phone.
“Well, you know, it’s about setting boundaries. He has to be told, ‘If we’re gonna
have these conversations it shouldn’t be
when one of us is drunk and the other one
is hanging upside down in the gravity
boots.’ ” As you listen longer, you’re not
sure if she’s the patient or the therapist.
“Do I think it’s good that you’re angry?
Why would I think it’s good that you’re
angry?” There are never fewer than eight
Tracey Ullman characters in any NYC nail
salon at any given time.
If all this becomes too much for you, just
look up and focus on the poster of a hand
with long red nails holding a violin
incorrectly.
Before you know it, your manicure is done
and looking great. Your fingernails look



healthy and fresh, and the shiny varnish
will help hide the little particles of garbage
and human feces that all city dwellers are
slightly covered in!
11) Aging Naturally Without Looking Like Time-Lapse Photography of
a
Rotting Sparrow
At a certain point your body wants to be
disgusting. While your teens and twenties
were about identifying and emphasizing
your “best features,” your late thirties and
forties are about fighting back decay. You
pluck your patchy beard daily. Your big toe
may start to turn jauntily inward.
Overnight you may grow one long straight
white pubic hair. Not that this has
happened to me, of course, because every
six months I get a very expensive Japanese



treatment that turns my pubic hair clear
like rice noodles.
We all mentally prepare ourselves for
wrinkles, but wrinkles are not the problem.
It’s the unexpected grosseries.
For example, your mouth. Dear God, your
mouth. No matter how diligent you are
about brushing and flossing—which is never diligent enough for that show-off dental
hygienist of yours—at some point you start
waking up every day with a mouth that
smells like a snail left in the sun. You can
fix it as soon as you get up—you brush and
use mouthwash—but there’s something
about knowing you woke up with hotmothball mouth that makes you feel old.
I think God designed our mouths to die
first to help us slowly transition to the
grave. But I am a big believer in



“Intelligent Design,” and by that I mean I
love IKEA!
12) The Most Important Rule of
Beauty
If you retain nothing else, always remember the most important Rule of Beauty.
“Who cares?”
Remembrances of Being Very Very
Skinny
For a brief time at the turn of the century, I
was very skinny. This is what I remember
about that period.
I was cold all the time.
I had a pair of size-four corduroy short
shorts. That I wore. To work. In the middle
of Manhattan.



I loved it when people told me I was getting too thin.
I once took a bag of sliced red peppers to
the beach as a snack.
I regularly ate health food cookies so disgusting that when I enthusiastically gave
one to Rachel Dratch she drew a picture of
a rabbit and broke the cookie into a trail of
tiny pieces coming out of the rabbit’s butt.
Men I had met before suddenly paid attention to me… and I hated them for it.
Sometimes I had to sleep with a pillow
between my legs because my bony knees
clanking together kept me awake.
I had a lot of time on my hands because I
wasn’t constantly eating.



I ran three miles a day on a treadmill six
days a week.
I felt wonderfully superior to everyone.
I didn’t have a kid yet.
We should leave people alone about their
weight. Being skinny for a while (provided
you actually eat food and don’t take pills or
smoke to get there) is a perfectly fine pastime. Everyone should try it once, like a
super-short haircut or dating a white guy.
Remembrances of Being a Little Bit
Fat
For a brief time at the end of that last century I was overweight. This is what I remember about that period.
My boobs were bigger.



I once left a restaurant in the middle of
dessert to get to Krispy Kreme before it
closed.
Even though I only liked McDonald’s fries,
I believed it was more nutritious to make a
meal of it and have two cheeseburgers as
well.
If I was really ambitious, I would get a
Whopper Jr. at Burger King and then walk
to McDonald’s to get the fries. The shake
could be from anywhere.
I could not run a mile.
I wore oversize men’s overalls that I loved.
Guys who were friends with me did not
want to date me… and I hated them for it.
On at least three occasions, I vomited on
Christmas Eve from mixing chocolate,



peel-and-eat shrimp, summer sausage, and
cheese. No alcohol was involved.
As a size twelve, I took pride in the idea
that I was “real woman”–sized. “Size
twelve is the national average,” I would
boast, “no matter what magazines try to
tell you.”
Once, while ironing in my underwear, I
grazed my protruding belly with the hot
iron.
We should leave people alone about their
weight. Being chubby for a while (provided
you don’t give yourself diabetes) is a natural phase of life and nothing to be ashamed
of. Like puberty or slowly turning into a
Republican.
A Childhood Dream, Realized



(Not the One Where I’m Being
Chased by Count Chocula)
In 1997 I flew to New York from Chicago to
interview for a writing position at
Saturday Night Live. It seemed promising
because I’d heard the show was looking to
diversify. Only in comedy, by the way, does
an obedient white girl from the suburbs
count as diversity. I came for my job interview in the only decent clothes I had—my
“show clothes” from The Second City.
Black pants and a lavender chenille sweater from Contempo Casuals. I went to the
security guard at the elevator and I heard
myself say,
“I’m here to see Lorne Michaels.” I couldn’t
believe the words that were coming out of
my mouth. “I’m here to see Lorne Michaels.” I was living one of my dreams.



This must be how people feel when they
really do go to school naked by accident.
I went up to the seventeenth-floor offices,
which were lined with archival photos from
the show—Jane Curtin ripping her shirt
open on Weekend Update, Gilda Radner
and Candice Bergen in a Beach Blanket
Bingo sketch, Al Franken’s head shot!
Then I sat on a couch and waited for my
meeting with Lorne. About an hour into
the wait, the assistants started making
popcorn in a movie theater popcorn machine—something I would later learn
signaled Lorne’s imminent arrival. To this
day the smell of fresh popcorn causes me
to experience stress, hunger, and sketch
ideas for John Goodman.
The only advice anyone had given me
about meeting with Lorne was “Whatever
you do, don’t finish his sentences.” A



Chicago actress I knew had apparently
made that mistake and she believed it cost
her the job. When I was eventually ushered
into his office, I sat down, determined not
to blow it.
Lorne said, “So you’re from…”
It seemed to hang there forever. Why
wasn’t he finishing the question? If I
answered now, would this count as my
talking over him? I couldn’t remember how
normal human speech patterns worked.
Another five seconds went by, and still no
more sentence from Lorne. Oh, God. When
I flew back to Chicago the next day they
were going to say, “How was your meeting
with Lorne Michaels?” And I would reply,
“He said ‘So you’re from’ and then we sat
there for an hour and then a girl came in
and asked me to leave.”



After what was probably, realistically, ten
seconds, I couldn’t take it anymore and I
blurted out,
“Pennsylvania. I’m from Pennsylvania, a
suburb of Philadelphia,” just as Lorne finally finished his thought, “Chicago.” I was
sure I had blown it. I don’t remember anything else that happened in the meeting
because I just kept staring at the nameplate on his desk that said “Lorne Michaels” and thinking, “This is the guy with
the Beatles check!” I couldn’t believe I was
in his office. I could have never guessed
that in a few years I’d be sitting in that office at two, three, four in the morning,
thinking, “If this meeting doesn’t end soon,
I’m going to kill this Canadian bastard.”
Somehow, I had gotten the job.



During my nine years at Saturday Night
Live, my relationship with Lorne
transitioned from
“Terrified Pupil and Reluctant Teacher” to
“Small-Town Girl and Streetwise Madam
Showing Her the Ropes” to “Annie and
Daddy Warbucks (touring company)” to
one of mutual respect and friendship.
Then it transitioned to “Sullen Teenage
Girl and Generous Stepfather,” then to
“Mr. and Mrs. Michael Jackson,” then, for
a brief period, to “Boy Who Doesn’t Believe
in Christmas and Recluse Neighbor Who
Proves that Miracles Are Possible,” then
back to mutual respect and friendship
again.
I’ve learned many things from Lorne, in
particular a managerial style that was the
opposite of Bossypants.



Things I
Michaels

Learned

from

Lorne

1) “Producing is about discouraging
creativity.”
A TV show comprises many departments—Costumes, Props, Talent, Graphics,
Set Dressing, Transportation. Everyone in
every department wants to show off their
skills and contribute creatively to the show,
which is a blessing. You’re grateful to work
with people who are talented and enthusiastic about their jobs. You would think that
as a producer, your job would be to churn
up creativity, but mostly your job is to police enthusiasm. You may have an occasion
where the script calls for a bran muffin on
a white plate and the Props Department
shows up with a bran cake in the shape of
Santa Claus sitting on a silver platter that



says “Welcome to Denmark.” “We just
thought it would be funny.”
And you have to find a polite way to explain that the character is Jewish, so her
eating Santa’s face might have negative
connotations, and the silver tray, while
beautiful, is giving a weird glare on camera
and maybe let’s go with the bran muffin on
the white plate.
And then sometimes Actors have what they
call “ideas.” Usually it involves them talking more, or, in the case of more experienced actors, sitting more. When Actors
have ideas it’s very important to get to the
core reason behind their idea.
Is there something you’re asking them to
do that’s making them uncomfortable? Are
they being asked to bare their midriff or
make out with a Dick Cheney look-alike?



(For the record, I have asked actors to do
both, and they were completely game.)
Rather than say, “I’m uncomfortable
breast-feeding a grown man who I just met
today,” the actor may speak in code and
say something like “I don’t think my character would do that.” Or “I’ve hurt my back
and I’m not coming out of my dressing
room.” You have to remember that actors
are human beings. Which is hard sometimes because they look so much better
than human beings. Is there someone in
the room the actor is trying to impress?
This is a big one and should not be overlooked. If a male actor is giving you a hard
time about something, you must immediately scan the area for pretty interns.
2) “The show doesn’t go on because
it’s ready; it goes on because it’s
11:30.”



This is something Lorne has said often
about Saturday Night Live, but I think it’s
a great lesson about not being too precious
about your writing. You have to try your
hardest to be at the top of your game and
improve every joke you can until the last
possible second, and then you have to let it
go.
You can’t be that kid standing at the top of
the waterslide, overthinking it. You have to
go down the chute. (And I’m from a generation where a lot of people died on waterslides, so this was an important lesson for
me to learn.) You have to let people see
what you wrote. It will never be perfect,
but perfect is overrated. Perfect is boring
on live TV.
What I learned about “bombing” as an improviser at Second City was that bombing
is painful, but it doesn’t kill you. No matter



how badly an improv set goes, you will still
be physically alive when it’s over. What I
learned about bombing as a writer at
Saturday Night is that you can’t be too
worried about your “permanent record.”
Yes, you’re going to write some sketches
that you love and are proud of
forever—your golden nuggets. But you’re
also going to write some real shit nuggets.
And unfortunately, sometimes the shit
nuggets will make it onto the air. You can’t
worry about it. As long as you know the
difference, you can go back to panning for
gold on Monday.
That’s what was so great about Will Ferrell.
He would do sketches that were absolutely
his voice and what (I assume) he loved
most—Bill Brasky, Robert Goulet, and
Cowbell—but he would commit just as fully
to tap-dancing next to Katie Holmes in the



monologue. He’s the Michael Caine of
sketch comedy.
He could be in something awful and it
would never stick to him.
3) When hiring, mix Harvard Nerds
with Chicago Improvisers and stir.
The writing staff of Saturday Night Live
has always been a mix of hyperintelligent
Harvard Boys*
(Jim Downey, Al Franken, Conan O’Brien)
and gifted, visceral, fun performers (John
Belushi, Gilda Radner, Jan Hooks, Horatio
Sanz, Bill Murray, Maya Rudolph). Lorne
somehow knew that too many of one or the
other would knock the show out of balance.
To generalize with abandon, if you had
nothing but Harvard guys, the whole show
would be commercial parodies about



people wearing barrels after the 1929 stock
market crash. “Flendersen’s Poverty Barrels, Replacing Clothes Despite Being More
Expensive since… Right Now. Formerly
known as Flendersen’s Pickles and Suspenders: A Semiotic Exegesis of Jazz Age
Excess and the Failings of the Sherman
Antitrust Act.”
If you had nothing but improvisers, the
whole show would be loud drag characters
named Vicki and Staci screaming their
catchphrase over and over, “YOU KISS
YOUR MUTHA WITH THAT FACE?”
Harvard Boys and Improv People think differently because their comedy upbringing
is so different. If you’re at the Harvard
Lampoon, sitting in a castle with your
friends, you can perfect a piece of writing
to be exactly what you want and you can
avoid the feeling of red-hot flop sweat.



Especially because you won’t even be there
when someone reads it. But when you’re
improvising eight shows a week in front of
drunk meat-eating Chicagoans, you will experience highs and lows. You will be
heckled, or, worse, you will hear your own
heartbeat over the audience’s silence. You
will be bombing so hard that you will be
able to hear a lady in the back put her gum
in a napkin. You may have a point to make
about the health care system in America,
but you’ll find out that you need to present
that idea through a legally blind bus driver
character or as an exotic dancer whose
boobs are running for mayor. (I would like
to see that sketch, actually.) Ultimately,
you will do whatever it takes to win that
audience over.
Harvard Is Classical Military Theory, Improv Is Vietnam.



This is all to make the case that Harvard
boys and Second City/Groundlings people
make beautiful comedy marriages. The
Harvard guys keep the Improvisers from
wallowing in schmaltz. (Steve Higgins used
to joke that every Second City sketch ended
with sentimental music and someone saying, “I love you, Dad.”)
The Harvard guys check the logic and construction of every joke, and the Improvisers teach them how to be human. It’s
Spock and Kirk. (I guess if you want to tie
all my metaphors together, it would be
Spock wearing a baldric and staying up all
night to write a talk show sketch with a
mentally ravaged Rambo Kirk.)
I tried to apply Lorne’s lesson when staffing 30 Rock, and it has worked well so far.
Our current staff makeup is four Harvard



nerds, four Performer-turned-writers, two
regular nerds, and two dirtbags.
4) “Television is a visual medium.”
Lorne has said this to me a lot. It basically
means “Go to bed. You look tired.” You
may want to be diligent and stay up with
the writers all night, but if you’re going to
be on the show, you can’t. Your
“street cred” with the staff won’t help anybody if you look like a cadaver on camera.
Also, don’t be afraid to make them get your
hair, makeup, and lighting right. It’s not
vanity, because if you look weird, it will
distract from what you’re trying to do. If
you look as good as you can, people will be
able to pay attention to what you’re actually saying.



5) “Don’t make any big decisions
right after the season ends.”
This is the same advice they give people
who’ve just come out of rehab. After a
grueling period of work (or what passes for
grueling work in our soft-handed world)
you will crave some kind of reward.
Don’t let this cause you to rush into a big
decision, like a new house or a marriage or
partial ownership of a minor league baseball team, that you may later regret. The
interesting thing about this piece of advice
is that no one ever takes it.
6) “Never cut to a closed door.”
Lorne sighed this once in exasperation
over some sketch I can’t remember. The
director had cut to a door a moment too
early, before the actor entered, and Lorne



felt we “lost the audience” in that moment.
This can mean a lot of things: Comedy is
about confidence, and the moment an
audience senses a slip in confidence,
they’re nervous for you and they can’t
laugh. Lorne would have preferred that the
camera cut follow the sound of the actor
knocking on the door. Which is to say that
the sketch should lead the cutting pattern,
which is to say content should dictate style,
which is to say that in TV
the writer is king.
In its most extrapolated version, I think
“Never cut to a closed door” means “Don’t
forget about showmanship.” Make the
entrance well-timed and exciting. Make the
set look pretty at Christmastime.



Add some dancers! There’s no harm in
things looking fun, and you don’t get extra
credit for keeping things indie and grim.
Or—and this is a distinct possibility—it
doesn’t mean anything and he was just in a
grouchy mood.
7) “Don’t hire anyone you wouldn’t
want to run into in the hallway at
three in
the morning.”
This one is incredibly helpful. We work
long hours at these shows, and no matter
how funny someone’s writing sample is, if
they are too talkative or needy or angry to
deal with in the middle of the night by the
printer, steer clear. That must be how I got
through that first job interview. I was not
dynamic, but at least I wasn’t nuts.



8) Never tell a crazy person he’s
crazy.
While never stated overtly, this seems to be
Lorne’s practice. There were many times in
my nine years at the show when I couldn’t
understand why Lorne wouldn’t just tell
people to “knock it off.”
Eccentric writers would turn in sketches
that were seventeen minutes long; immature performers tried fits and tears when
their sketch was later in the show than
they’d like. My every terrible instinct
would have been to pull these culprits
aside and scold them like a schoolmarm.
“Please explain to me why your sketch
should get to be three times longer than
everyone else’s. Why won’t you take the
perfectly reasonable cuts I suggested?”
“How dare you pitch a fit about what time
your sketch is on? Some people didn’t get



to be in the show at all. Do you think you’re
working harder than everyone else? We’re
all working hard!” But there is not one
management course in the world where
they recommend Self-Righteousness as a
tool.
Lorne has an indirect and very effective
way of dealing with the crazies. It is best
described by the old joke that most people
know from Annie Hall. A man goes to a
psychiatrist and says, “My brother’s gone
crazy. He thinks he’s a chicken.” And the
psychiatrist says, “Have you told him he’s
not a chicken?” The man replies, “I would,
but we need the eggs.” Lorne knows that
the most exhausting people occasionally
turn out the best stuff. How do I explain
the presence of crazy people on the staff if
we’re following Rule #7? Easily: These
crazy people are charming and brilliant
and great fun to see at three in the



morning. Also, some people arrive at the
show sane and the show turns them crazy.
In fairness to others, I will use myself as an
example. In October 2001, Manhattan was
a tense place to work. But we all continued
to work because it seemed like the
Churchillian thing to do. One Friday morning I was sitting in my tiny dressing room
at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, trying to write
jokes for Weekend Update. I was reading a
thick packet of newspaper clippings, looking for something fun to say about Afghanistan, the Taliban, Saddam Hussein, the
anthrax postal deaths: It was grim. Then,
on the TV
hanging in the corner, Lester Holt came on
MSNBC and said, “Breaking news. Anthrax
has been found at 30 Rockefeller Plaza.
CDC officials are investigating the potentially deadly substance, which was found in



a suspicious package addressed to NBC
Nightly News anchor Tom Brokaw and
mailed to his offices in 30
Rockefeller Plaza.” If you have decent
reading comprehension skills you will remember from the beginning of this paragraph that I, too, was at 30 Rockefeller Anthrax Plaza. Not 45 Rockefeller Plaza.
Not 1661 Sixth Avenue. 30 Rockefeller
Plaza. “Nope,” I thought. “I give up.” I put
on my coat, walked downstairs past my
friends and coworkers without saying anything. I walked right past the host for that
week, sweet Drew Barrymore, without
telling her what I had heard. I just went to
the elevator and left. I walked up Sixth Avenue to Central Park West. I walked up
Central Park West to 96th Street and
across 96th Street to my apartment on



West End Avenue, where I would wait to
die.
Several hours later, Lorne called and said
gently, “We’re all here. You and Drew are
the only ones who left… and Drew came
back a few hours ago, so… We’re ordering
dinner, if you want to come back in.” It was
the most gentle, non-Bossypants way of
saying “You’re embarrassing yourself.” I
got back to work that evening just in time
to find everyone assembled on the studio
floor. Andy Lack, the head of NBC News,
was addressing the crew in an emergency
briefing. Once again, nothing is creepier
than a bunch of adults being very quiet.
Mr. Lack explained that the envelope was
found in the third-floor NBC News offices,
so the CDC would be “swabbing” workers
from the second floor to the sixth floor,
just to be safe. (Remember all those fun



catchphrases
“Cutaneous,”

from

2001?

“Swabbing,”

“Cipro,” “I am Zoolander.”) Some of our
camera guys were irate that we on the
eighth floor would not be swabbed. They
occasionally filled in down in News. The
discussion got heated. As I watched from
the audience balcony, I remember feeling
tremendous affection for everyone there. I
felt like we were a family and that if we had
to go, at least we’d all go together. I guess I
forgot that just a few hours earlier I had
booked it out of there, leaving them all to
die. I have a uniquely German capacity to
vacillate between sentimentality and
coldness.
The point is, Lorne did not do what I would
have done, which is to say, “You’re being
crazy. Get back in here. Everyone else is
here. Do you think you’re more important



than everybody else?” He also didn’t
coddle me, which is what I would have
done if I were trying to overcompensate for
my natural sternness. “Are you okay? If
you need to take a couple days off, I’m sure
we can manage, blah, blah, blah.”
Instead, he found a way for me to slip back
in the door like my mental breakdown never happened. “We’re ordering dinner.
What do you want?”
He knew how to get the eggs.
Peeing in Jars with Boys
My first show as a writer at Saturday
Night Live was September 27, 1997. The
host was Sylvester Stallone. It was the first
time I had ever seen a real movie star up
close. Real movie stars do look different
from regular people. They are often a little



smaller and usually have nicer teeth, shoes,
and watches than anyone else in the room.
Mr. Stallone smoked a cigar during the
host meeting, which was pretty badass. I
don’t remember what sketch ideas I
pitched in that first meeting, but I know
that on that first writing night, I completely froze up. I sat at my computer from
one P.M. Tuesday afternoon until nine
A.M. Wednesday morning and nothing
came out. I wasn’t used to sitting by myself
and writing. I’d been improvising with five
other people every night for two years. I
ended up submitting an old sketch that I
had written as part of my job application.
Needless to say, my sketch didn’t get
picked for the show, but I was assigned to
help “cover” a sketch that Cheri Oteri had
written with another writer. Writers are often assigned to help produce sketches that
the performers write. I followed Cheri and



writer Scott Wainio around through rehearsal, occasionally pitching jokes for the
sketch that were (rightfully) ignored. During the dress rehearsal, Lorne gave us the
note that he couldn’t understand Stallone
in the sketch and we should ask him to
enunciate more. I stood nervously outside
the host’s dressing room with Scott Wainio. He had been there a year already, so I
figured he’d know what to do. Scott’s experience level was evident when he looked
at me and shrugged. “You tell him.”
My trademark obedience kicked in and I
found myself knocking on the door and being ushered in. Judge Dredd himself was
on the couch in an undershirt, smoking another cigar. He looked up at me. I
muttered, “In the Rita sketch, you were a
little hard to understand. Can you just
enunciate a little more?” Stallone was unfazed. “Youcannunnastanme? Youneeme



nanaunciate maw? Okay.” He couldn’t
have been more easygoing about it. My
guess is that this was not the first time in
his career he had been given that note. I
went back outside and manually released
my butt cheeks. Over the years I came to
realize that the movie star hosts of the
show were just people who wanted to do a
good job and (with the exception of a very
small handful of d-bags) were eager for any
guidance. Who were the d-bags, you ask? I
couldn’t possibly tell you. But if you want
to figure it out, here’s a clue: The letters
from their names are sprinkled randomly
through this chapter.
The only other thing I remember about the
Sylvester Stallone show was that they did a
Rocky-themed monologue and they needed
someone to play Rocky’s wife, Adrian.
Cheri really wanted the part—she was
little, she was from Philly, she could do a



good imitation of Talia Shire—but instead,
somebody thought it would be funnier to
put Chris Kattan in a dress. I remember
thinking that was kind of bullshit.
I wasn’t privy to the decision-making process at the time; it was my first week, after
all. When I reminded producer Steve Higgins of it recently, he (understandably)
couldn’t remember whose idea it was, and
thought that it might have even been
Sylvester Stallone’s. No offense to Kattan,
whom I love, or Sylvester Stallone, but I
think Cheri would have been funnier as
Adrian. Now, an anecdote about somebody
at the show being frustrated and feeling
cheated is hardly worth mentioning. It
happens to everyone, male or female, at
some point every week. Saturday Night
Live runs on a combustion engine of ambition and disappointment.



But I tell this specific tale of Cheri being
passed over for Kattan-in-drag because it
illustrates how things were the first week I
was there. By the time I left nine years
later, that would never have happened.
Nobody would have thought for a second
that a dude in drag would be funnier than
Amy, Maya, or Kristen. The women in the
cast took over the show in that decade, and
I had the pleasure of being there to witness
it.
A FAQ (Freaking
Question)

Always-asked

People often ask me about the difference
between male and female comedians. Do
men and women find different things
funny? I usually attempt an answer that is
so diplomatic and boring that the person
will just walk away. Something like
“There’s a tremendous amount of overlap



in what men and women think is funny.
And I hate to generalize, but I would say at
the far ends of the spectrum, men may
prefer visceral, absurd elements like sharks
and robots, while women are more drawn
to character-based jokes and verbal idiosyncrasies….” Have you walked away yet?
Here’s the truth. There is an actual difference between male and female comedy
writers, and I’m going to reveal it now. The
men urinate in cups. And sometimes jars.
One of the first times I walked into my old
boss Steve Higgins’s office, he was eating
an apple and smoking a cigarette at the
same time.
(When I started at SNL, you could still
smoke in an office building. I might not be
young.) I had only been there a few weeks,
and Steve had been very encouraging and
supportive. I forget what we were talking



about, but I went to get a reference book
off a high shelf in Steve’s office. I reached
to move the paper cup that was in front of
it, and Higgins jumped up. “Don’t touch
that. Hang on.” He grabbed the cup and a
couple others like it around the office and
took them out of the room to dump them.
“Oh yeah, that’s pee in those cups,” my
friend Paula later informed me. I could not
believe it. I had come from The Second
City, which was by no means clean—it
would not be unheard-of to see a rat giving
birth in an overstuffed ashtray, for example. But I had never heard of anyone
peeing in a cup except at a doctor’s office.
Maybe you’d do it on a road trip if it was
too far between rest stops. I had definitely
never heard of anyone peeing in a cup and
leaving it in their own office on a bookshelf
to evaporate and be absorbed back into
their body through the pores on their face.



I told another male coworker about what I
had seen. Was it not the grossest thing he
had ever heard? He answered matter-offactly that he occasionally did it, too. Not
all the time. He said it was just something
guys did when they were too lazy to go to
the bathroom. The bathroom, I should
point out, was about as far away as you are
from this book. I started to feel like I was
from space.
I called Jeff back in Chicago. “You grew up
way out in the country with a bunch of
brothers. Did you ever pee in cups and,
like, leave them around?” Jeff was incredulous. “What? No! That’s disgusting.”
One thousand points for Jeff.
Once I was aware of this practice, I started
noticing the cups in other places. In the
Weekend Update offices—which were like



the smarter-but-meaner older brother of
the regular writers’
offices—there weren’t any cups. There was
a jar.* It was a jar of piss with a lid on it,
and judging by its consistency, I suspect
they sometimes spat into the piss. Or that
one of them was terribly ill. You could see
it when you came in the door, backlit by
the afternoon sun, and at first it seemed to
me like a little test. If you saw the piss jar
and dared to ignore it and continue into
the room, you were welcomed.
Welcomed is too strong a word. You were…
one of the guys? Nope, you know what?
The more I think about it, I’m just projecting. It couldn’t have been a test, because
they really didn’t give a fuck whether you
came in the room or not.



And no, not all of the men whizzed in cups.
But four or five of them out of twenty did,
so the men have to own that one. Anytime
there’s a bad female stand-up somewhere,
some dickhead Interblogger will deduce
that “women aren’t funny.” Using that
same math, I can state: Male comedy
writers piss in cups.
Also, they like to pretend to rape each other. It’s… Don’t worry about it. It’s harmless, actually.
So, to sum up my room-clearing generalizations, men are in comedy to break rules.
Conversely, the women I know in comedy
are all good daughters, good citizens, mildmannered college graduates.
Maybe we women gravitate toward comedy
because it is a socially acceptable way to
break rules and a release from our daily



life. Have you left me for the cheese tray
yet?
Kotex Classic
This is the story of my proudest moment as
one of the head writers of SNL.
At the beginning of each season, the staff
would write commercial parodies—the fake
commercials you have enjoyed over the
past thirty-five years, such as Schmitt’s
Gay and Colon Blow. I wish I wrote either
of those, but I didn’t. (I did write Mom
Jeans, Annuale, and Excedrin for Racial
Tension Headaches, if that helps.)
Each writer would submit two or three
scripts, and the producers and head writers
picked which commercials would be shot.
We tried to choose carefully because unlike
the live sketches, these commercials were



shot on film (in the days before HD video)
and could cost up to $100,000. It was a big
deal to get your commercial parody made
because they were permanent. They could
repeat forever.
Once again, this was in the days before
YouTube, so reruns were meaningful, and
profitable.
In a normal SNL show week, every sketch
is read aloud by the cast at a “table read” in
front of the whole staff. The room is
packed with all the writers, designers,
stage managers, musicians, etc., so you
have a nice big audience. Everyone can
hear where there are laughs and everyone
has a sense of which sketches could work.
The commercial parodies didn’t get that
treatment, and choosing which ones to
produce always brought out the worst in
everyone.



I would read the packet of forty scripts and
pick the ones I liked. Dennis McNicholas,
the other head writer, would pick the ones
he liked. Not surprisingly, we each strongly
preferred the ones our friends wrote.
(There was an unspoken rule that you never pushed for your own piece, ever.) Then
we would each privately corner the producers—Steve Higgins and Tim Herlihy—and
try to get them to agree with us. Higgins,
Herlihy, Dennis, and I would continue this
square dance of selling one another out for
a week or so, only to find that Jim
Signorelli, the colorful, long-standing director of these taped pieces, had started
making whatever parody he liked without
asking anyone, usually because it had high
production values or a visual style he felt
like shooting. It’s a miracle anything ever
got done.



There was one parody script that I really
fought for. It was back when “classic” was a
big advertising trend. Coke Classic. Reebok
Classic. The very very funny Paula Pell had
written a script called Kotex Classic. It was
as if Kotex were trying to revive nostalgia
for those old 1960s maxi pads that hooked
to a belt. It featured the women in the cast
enjoying fun “modern gal” activities while
giant sanitary napkins poked out of their
low-rise jeans. It seemed to me like an excellent parody of nostalgia-based marketing while also being a little shocking and
silly, which is great for an SNL
commercial. I kept bringing it up in meetings only to be told that it would be “too
difficult to produce.”
Paula and I weren’t sure what that meant,
so we kept pressing. Finally, Steve Higgins
and Jim Signorelli sat down with us and



asked us to explain. “How would we see it?
Is it a thing that comes up the front?
Would we have to zoom in on it? Wouldn’t
the girls have to take their pants off?
Would we see blood?”
And this was what Oprah would call an
Aha Moment for me. (Trademark Oprah
Winfrey; please send a check for eightynine cents to Harpo Industries for having
read that.) They didn’t know what a maxi
pad belt was. It was the moment I realized
that there was no “institutionalized sexism” at that place. Sometimes they just literally didn’t know what we were talking
about. Just as I was not familiar with the
completely normal custom of pissing in
jars, they had never been handed a fifteenyear-old Kotex product by the school
nurse. But they trusted me and Paula, so



I’m proud to say we made her commercial
and the commercial worked.
Two things were reassuring about this.
One, that we were heard. Because Paula
was such a goddamn hit factory—she wrote
the Cheerleaders, among many other
things—they were willing to trust us.
And, more important, for all those years
that I was sure that boys could tell when I
had a loaf-of-bread-size maxi pad going up
the back of my pants, they actually had no
idea.
I Don’t Care If You Like It
(One in a series of love letters to
Amy Poehler)
Amy Poehler was new to SNL and we were
all crowded into the seventeenth-floor
writers’ room, waiting for the Wednesday



read-through to start. There were always a
lot of noisy “comedy bits” going on in that
room. Amy was in the middle of some such
nonsense with Seth Meyers across the
table, and she did something vulgar as a
joke. I can’t remember what it was exactly,
except it was dirty and loud and
“unladylike.”
Jimmy Fallon, who was arguably the star
of the show at the time, turned to her and
in a faux-squeamish voice said, “Stop that!
It’s not cute! I don’t like it.”
Amy dropped what she was doing, went
black in the eyes for a second, and wheeled
around on him. “I don’t fucking care if you
like it.” Jimmy was visibly startled. Amy
went right back to enjoying her ridiculous
bit. (I should make it clear that Jimmy and
Amy are very good friends and there was



never any real beef between them. Insert
penis joke here.)
With that exchange, a cosmic shift took
place. Amy made it clear that she wasn’t
there to be cute. She wasn’t there to play
wives and girlfriends in the boys’ scenes.
She was there to do what she wanted to do
and she did not fucking care if you like it.
I was so happy. Weirdly, I remember
thinking, “My friend is here! My friend is
here!” Even though things had been going
great for me at the show, with Amy there, I
felt less alone.
I think of this whenever someone says to
me, “Jerry Lewis says women aren’t
funny,” or
“Christopher Hitchens says women aren’t
funny,” or “Rick Fenderman says women



aren’t funny…. Do you have anything to say
to that?”
Yes. We don’t fucking care if you like it.
I don’t say it out loud, of course, because
Jerry Lewis is a great philanthropist,
Hitchens is very sick, and the third guy I
made up.
Unless one of these men is my boss, which
none of them is, it’s irrelevant. My hat goes
off to them. It is an impressively arrogant
move to conclude that just because you
don’t like something, it is empirically not
good. I don’t like Chinese food, but I don’t
write articles trying to prove it doesn’t
exist.
So my unsolicited advice to women in the
workplace is this. When faced with sexism
or ageism or lookism or even really



aggressive Buddhism, ask yourself the following question: “Is this person in between
me and what I want to do?” If the answer is
no, ignore it and move on. Your energy is
better used doing your work and outpacing
people that way. Then, when you’re in
charge, don’t hire the people who were
jerky to you.
If the answer is yes, you have a more difficult road ahead of you. I suggest you model
your strategy after the old Sesame Street
film piece “Over! Under! Through!” (If
you’re under forty you might not remember this film. It taught the concepts of
“over,” “under,” and “through” by filming
toddlers crawling around an abandoned
construction site. They don’t show it anymore because someone has since realized
that’s nuts.)



If your boss is a jerk, try to find someone
above or around your boss who is not a
jerk.* If you’re lucky, your workplace will
have a neutral proving ground—like the
rifle range or the car sales total board or
the SNL read-through. If so, focus on that.
Again, don’t waste your energy trying to
educate or change opinions. Go “Over!
Under!
Through!” and opinions will change organically when you’re the boss. Or they won’t.
Who cares?
Do your thing and don’t care if they like it.
Amazing, Gorgeous, Not Like That
People sometimes ask me, “What’s it like
to do photo shoots for magazines?” “Do
you enjoy that kind of thing?” Let me be
completely honest here. Publicity and



press junkets are just part of the job. Your
work is what you really care about because
your work is your craft and your craft is
your art and photo shoots are THE
FUNNEST!
In case you ever find yourself at a
magazine cover shoot (and you might, because Snooki and I have, so anything can
happen!), let me tell you what to expect.
It’s usually in some cool space called White
or Smash House or Jinx Studios. Sometimes it’s at an amazing hotel. Wherever it
is, it’s nicer than where you had your wedding. You take a freight elevator up to a
beautiful loft where there is a coffee bar at
which everything is free. Free, I say!
I suggest you show up freshly scrubbed
with damp hair. Not only is this a courtesy
to your hair and makeup team but also it



helps to set the bar low. Show up looking
like an uncooked chicken leg and they can’t
help but be pleased with the transformation once they get all their makeup on you.
I think this is what Jesse Jackson calls the
“subtle genius of lowered expectations,”
but I may be misquoting.
You’ll be introduced to the stylist and
shown racks and racks of clothes. She has
been given your sizes ahead of time and
has chosen to ignore them. All the shoes
will be too big and all the pants and skirts
will be a 5T. The stylists like to figure out a
few looks before hair and makeup begins,
so you will try on twenty or thirty things.
Somebody will put up a makeshift wall by
holding a full-length mirror next to an
open loft window, and you will strip down
naked. You must not look in that mirror at
your doughy legs and flat feet, for today is



about dreams and illusions, and unfiltered
natural daylight is the enemy of dreams.
When you inevitably can’t fit into a garment, the stylist’s assistant will be sent in
to help you.
The stylist’s assistant will be a chic twentyyear-old Asian girl named Esther or Agnes
or Lot’s Wife.
In a few years she’ll be running the editorial staff, but at this point in time her job is
to stuff a middle-aged woman’s bare ass
crack into a Prada dress and zip it up. In
my case, Esther and I are always mutually
frustrated when zipping up the tiny dress.
Esther is disgusted by my dimply flesh and
her low status. I’m annoyed that her tiny
hands lack the strength to get Pandora’s
plague back into the box.



“How’s it going in there?” calls the stylist
passive-aggressively. Reinforcements are
called in to push on both sides of my ribcage until the zipper goes up. To avoid conflict, we all blame a third party. “It’s these
damn invisible zippers!” we say in unison.
“I don’t know why designers use them!”
The reason none of the dresses fit is because they are “samples.” They are from
the runway and they were made to fit runway models. Sometimes I can actually fit in
the sample size because at five foot four I
have the waist size of a seven-foot model.
“You can fit in a sample size!” they tell me
triumphantly, with the dress straining at
the seams, two feet too long on the bottom,
and the bra cups hanging right above my
navel. They want this to be important to
you, so go with it.



Next you are taken to the hair and makeup
chair. “Do you have anything on your
face?” the makeup artist will ask gently.
You don’t because, as previously mentioned, you are sandbagging. The makeup
artist will then delicately apply expensive
moisturizer to your chicken leg while the
hair stylist massages your scalp (secretly
checking for bald spots).
Once you’re moisturized and have enjoyed
your free cappuccino, the makeup transformation begins in earnest. They pluck
your eyebrows for what seems like twenty
minutes even though you have already
plucked them fully the night before.
If you’re like me, you probably take ten to
twelve seconds a day to put on some eyeliner and mascara. Maybe you throw in five
seconds of eye shadow if it’s New Year’s
Eve. The makeup artist at your photo shoot



will work methodically on your eyelids
with a series of tickly little brushes for a
hundred minutes. It’s soothing, actually,
because you must sit still and you absolutely can’t do anything else. She will do
this thing before she lines your lips where
she puts her finger on your top lip and rolls
it back ever so gently. When she is done,
you look like you have lips! Not crazy overdrawn grandma lips like you would do, but
God-given lips.
While this is going on, someone gives you a
manicure and a pedicure. At really fancy
shoots, a celebrity fecalist will study your
bowel movements and adjust your
humours.
The leg massage and the warm lights of the
makeup mirror feel so cozy that you could
almost believe that this is your actual life



instead of that endless degrading “looking
for the checkbook” and
“boiling macaroni” shit you live with at
home.
At some point in the morning, one of the
stylists or publicists or fecalists will declare
that the free coffee is “not working for me,”
and some intern is sent out to get other
coffee. Or bubble tea. Or gum, Advil, Red
Bull, and egg white omelets that are
destined to be forgotten about and left on a
windowsill.
Only when your makeup is done will they
start to do your hair. You hair will be
blown straight, then set on large rollers.
The hairdresser’s assistant hands him
rollers and pins on command like an OR



nurse. These fashionable young assistants
are a fun window into what the rest of us
will be wearing three years from now.
From what I’ve seen lately, we can look forward to the return of prairie skirts and the
male shag. (The prairie skirts will be on
men and the male shag will be on women.)
Once your hair is straightened, it will be
curled, then shown to the photographer,
who will stare at it with his or her head
cocked to one side. Then it will be
restraightened.
Depending on the concept for the shoot
and the health of your natural hair, you
may be asked to wear hair extensions. It’s
okay. A controlled, photo shoot environment is where extensions belong.
Places that are less ideal for hair extensions: the grocery store, women’s prison, a
water park.



Once your hair and makeup are done,
you’ll slip into your first look. It will most
definitely be one of the dresses that didn’t
even come close to fitting you, so Lot’s
Wife will bridge the gap with a thick piece
of white elastic and some safety pins. Don’t
ever feel inadequate when you look at
magazines. Just remember that every person you see on a cover has a bra and underwear hanging out a gaping hole in the
back. Everyone. Heidi Klum, the Olsen
Twins, David Beckham, everybody.
Et voilà! Just two to three hours after your
arrival, you are ready to be taken to the
photographer and shot.
There are different types of fancy photographers. Some are big, fun personalities
like Mario Testino, who once told me, “Lift
your chin, darling, you are not eighteen.” I



enjoyed his honesty. Also, I’m pretty sure
he says that to models who are nineteen.
Some photographers plan out every detail
of the shot, then plug you into it. For example, with Annie Leibovitz, you might
have advance fittings for several custom
Tinkerbell costumes. On the day of the
shoot, Annie will pick one of the costumes,
then obscure it with a large harness. Afterward, she’ll remove the harness with Photoshop, change the color of the costume,
and shrink you down to the size of a pea
anyway.
There are the nonchalant “cool guy” photographers who shoot for Rolling Stone and
GQ. Watch out for these guys, because
their offhand manner can trick you and the
next thing you know, you’re posing with
your pants off. Or worse, with your shoes
off.



I’m a firm believer in our constitutional
right to wear shoes, and I believe more
people should take advantage of it. I never
go barefoot during a photo shoot. Even if
they say your feet are “out of frame,” don’t
believe them. I know what you’re thinking
and no, I don’t have horrible messed-up
feet.
Maybe my feet are so amazing that I want
to shelter them so they can live a normal
life. I don’t want them to be the Suri Cruise
of feet. Did you ever think about that?

The photographer will ask you what kind
of music you want to play during the shoot.
Remember that whatever you choose will
be blasted through the loft and heard by an
entire crew of people who are all so cool
that the Board of Ed. officially closed
school.
Just murmur, “Hip-hop,” or make up the
name of a hipster-sounding band and then
act superior when they’ve never heard of it.
“Do you guys have any Asphalt of Pinking?
*disappointed+ Really?
[shrug] Whatever you want, then.”
Sometimes they ask if you want to hook up
your iPod for background music. Do not
do this. It’s a trap. They’ll put it on shuffle,
and no matter how much Beastie Boys or
Velvet Underground you have on there, the
following four tracks will play in a row:



“We’d Like to Thank You Herbert Hoover”
from Annie,
“Hold On” by Wilson Phillips, “That’s
What Friends Are For,” Various Artists,
and “We’d Like to Thank You Herbert
Hoover” from Annie.
To get through the actual shooting process,
there are three skills you need to master.
1) Posing
Posing for a successful glamour portrait is
very simple. Start with the basics. Turn
sideways. Lean back against a wall. Move
your chin forward to elongate your neck.
Relax your shoulders. Make angles
wherever possible. If you’re over twentyfour, smile at all times. Keep your arms
slightly away from your sides so as not to
smush them and make them look larger.



Suck your stomach up and in, and wrap
your buttocks toward the back, Pilatesstyle. Be yourself. When you look into the
lens, imagine you are looking at a dear
friend, but not a friend who would laugh at
you for jutting out your chin while arching
your back against a fake wall.
Know your weaknesses. For example, I
have what can be described as “dead shark
eyes.” But if I try too hard to look alert, I
look batshit crazy, like the runaway bride.
If a bout of “creepy face” sets in, the trick is
to look away from the camera between
shots and turn back only when necessary.
This also limits how much of your soul the
camera can steal.
2) Dealing with What Is Being Said
to You



Most photographers have some kind of
verbal patter going on when they shoot:
“Great. Turn to me. Big smile. Less shark
eyes. Have fun with it. Not like that.”
Some photographers are compulsively effusive. “Beautiful. Amazing. Gorgeous!
Ugh, so gorgeous!” they yell at shutter
speed. If you are anything less than insane,
you will realize this is not sincere. It’s hard
to take because it’s more positive feedback
than you’ve received in your entire life
thrown at you in fifteen seconds. It would
be like going jogging while someone rode
next to you in a slow-moving car, yelling,
“Yes! You are Carl Lewis! You’re breaking a
world record right now. Amazing!
You are fast. You’re going very fast, yes!”
With the wind blowing on your long extensions, you feel like Beyoncé. The moment



the wind machine stops, you catch a
glimpse of yourself in the mirror and wonder, “Why is the mother from Coal Miner’s
Daughter here?”
Your impulse will be to wilt with embarrassment. Do not! Before you look up for
the bucket of pig’s blood, remember, your
third and most difficult task is “Trying to
Enjoy It.”
3) Trying to Enjoy It (Proceed as if
You Look Awesome.)
This requires a level of delusion/egomania
usually reserved for popes and drag
queens, but you can do it. It’s like being a
little kid again, parading around in a nightgown tucked into your underpants, believing it looks terrific. Your “right mind”
knows that you look ridiculous in a halfopen dress and giant shoes, but you must



put yourself back in third grade, slipping
on your mom’s quilted caftan and drinking
cream soda out of a champagne glass while
watching The Love Boat. You have never
been more glamorous.
“Believe you are worthy of the cover,” as
Mario Testino might say to a tense, sharkeyed forty year old.
After about seventeen minutes of shooting,
they call lunch. The catered lunch makes
you feel like you’re finally the person you
always wanted to be. Vegetable tartlets.
Arugula salad with figs, quinoa, fish that is
somehow more flavorful and delicious than
a Wendy’s hamburger. Miniature lemon
meringue pies. Hibiscus iced tea. You fantasize about how wonderful your life would
be if you had this food delivered every day.
Oh, the energy you would have! Your stools



would be museum quality. You could finally impress the fecalist.
At this point someone from your real job or
home life will call to check in. Pretend
you’re exhausted and that this whole photo
shoot thing is a big inconvenience. Say
you’ll be done by six and that you’ll be sure
to get home in time to help organize the
basement storage unit. Then hang up! Do
not let those people kill your buzz!
Your afternoon will fly by as you get more
and more confident posing like an old Virginia Slims ad.
And then you’re done. You get back into
this morning’s sweatpants, brush out your
hair, which by now looks like you’ve been
standing on a tarmac all day, and that’s it.



You don’t get to keep the clothes, by the
way. Some people say that the really famous people get to keep the clothes, but I
suspect it’s just the pushiest, most deluded
people who get to keep the clothes because
they steal them and no one says anything.
Your only keepsakes are the individual
false eyelashes that you later find stuck to
your boob in the shower.
(Someone should do a study of the human
brain and how quickly it can adjust to luxury. You could take a homeless person who
has been living on the street for twenty
years, and if you let them do three
magazine photo shoots, by the fourth one
they’d be saying, “Louboutins don’t really
work on me.
Can I try the Roger Vivier?” By the fifth
one they’d sigh, “Do they not have the vegetable tartlets?



Bummer!” in a passive-aggressive tone that
means “Somebody go get them.”) You may
sink into a slight depression over the next
thirty-six hours. You may wonder why your
loved ones don’t call out, “Amazing, gorgeous, right to me!” as you scramble their
eggs.
But just be patient, for in a few weeks, the
magazine will be out and you will have incontrovertible proof that you are a young
Catherine Deneuve. You casually check the
newsstand on your way to buy Bengay
heating pads. One day, there it is! Right
between Jessica Simpson and those people
from The Bachelor who murdered each
other—it’s your face! It is your face, right?
You can barely recognize yourself with the
amount of digital correction. They’ve taken
out your knuckles and given you baby
hands. The muscular calves that you’re
generally very proud of are slimmed to the



bone. And what’s with the eyes? They always get it wrong under the eyes. In an effort to remove dark circles they take out
any depth, and your face looks like it was
drawn on a paper plate. You looked forward to them taking out your chicken pox
scars and broken blood vessels, but how do
you feel when they erase part of you that is
perfectly good?
We have now entered the debate over
America’s most serious and pressing issue:
Photoshop.
A lot of women are outraged by the use of
Photoshop in magazine photos. I say a lot
of women because I have yet to meet one
man who could give a fat turd about the
topic. Not even a gay man.
I feel about Photoshop the way some
people feel about abortion. It is appalling



and a tragic reflection on the moral decay
of our society… unless I need it, in which
case, everybody be cool.
Do I think Photoshop is being used excessively? Yes. I saw Madonna’s Louis Vuitton
ad and honestly, at first glance, I thought it
was Gwen Stefani’s baby.
Do I worry about overly retouched photos
giving women unrealistic expectations and
body image issues? I do. I think that we
will soon see a rise in anorexia in women
over seventy. Because only people over
seventy are fooled by Photoshop. Only
your great-aunt forwards you an image of
Sarah Palin holding a rifle and wearing an
American-flag bikini and thinks it’s real.
Only your uncle Vic sends a photo of
Barack Obama wearing a hammer and
sickle T-shirt and has to have it explained



to him that somebody faked that with the
computer.
People have learned how to spot it. Just
like how everyone learned to spot fake
boobs—look for the upper-arm meat. If
there’s no upper-arm meat, the breasts are
fake. Unlike breast implants, which can
mess up your health, digital retouching is
relatively harmless. As long as we all know
it’s fake, it’s no more dangerous to society
than a radio broadcast of The War of the
Worlds.



Photoshop is just like makeup. When it’s
done well it looks great, and when it’s overdone you look like a crazy asshole. Unfortunately, most people don’t do it well. I
find, the fancier the fashion magazine is,
the worse the Photoshop. It’s as if they are
already so disgusted that a human has to



be in the clothes, they can’t stop erasing
human features.
“Why can’t we accept the human form as it
is?” screams no one. I don’t know why, but
we never have. That’s why people wore corsets and neck stretchers and powdered
wigs.
If you’re going to expend energy being mad
about Photoshop, you’ll also have to be
mad about earrings. No one’s ears are that
sparkly! They shouldn’t have to be! You’ll
have to get mad about oil paintings—those
people didn’t really look like that! I for one
am furious that people are allowed to turn
sideways in photographs! Why can’t we accept a woman’s full width?! I won’t rest until people are only allowed to be photographed facing front under a fluorescent
light.



It should absolutely be mandatory for
magazines to credit the person who performed the Photoshop work, just like they
do the makeup artist and the stylist… in
very tiny white print on white paper.
Some people say it’s a feminist issue. I
agree, because the best Photoshop job I
ever got was for a feminist magazine called
Bust in 2004.

It was a low-budget shoot in the back of
their downtown office. There was no free



coffee bar or wind machine, just a bunch of
intelligent women with a sense of humor.
I looked at the two paltry lights they had
set up and turned to the editors. “We’re all
feminists here, but you’re gonna use Photoshop, right?” “Oh, yeah,” they replied instantly. Feminists do the best Photoshop
because they leave the meat on your bones.
They don’t change your size or your skin
color.
They leave in your disgusting knuckles, but
they may take out some armpit stubble.
Not because they’re denying its existence,
but because they understand that it’s okay
to make a photo look as if you were caught
on your best day in the best light.
In an act of amazing bravery, I will let you
see this photo of me with Photoshop and
without.



There are seven differences. See if you can
spot them.*
Photoshop itself is not evil. Just like Italian
salad dressing is not inherently evil, until
you rub it all over a desperate young actress and stick her on the cover of Maxim,
pretending to pull her panties down. (That
“thumbs in the panties” move is the worst.
Really? It’s not enough that they got
greased up and in their panties for you,
Maxim?)
Give it up. Retouching is here to stay.
Technology doesn’t move backward. No society has ever de-industrialized. Which is
why we’ll never turn back from Photoshop—and why the economic collapse of
China is going to be the death of us all.
Never mind that. Let’s keep being up in
arms about this Photoshop business!



I don’t see a future in which we’re all anorexic and suicidal. I do see a future in which
we all retouch the bejeezus out of our own
pictures at home. Family Christmas cards
will just be eyes and nostrils in a snowman
border.
At least with Photoshop you don’t really
have to alter your body. It’s better than all
these disgusting injectibles and implants.
Isn’t it better to have a computer do it to
your picture than to have a doctor do it to
your face?
I have thus far refused to get any Botox or
plastic surgery. (Although I do wear a clear
elastic chin strap that I hook around my
ears and pin under my day wig.) I can’t be
expected to lead the charge on everything.
Let me have my Photoshop.
For today is about dreams!



Dear Internet
One of my greatest regrets, other than being the Zodiac Killer never learning to
tango, is that I don’t always have time to
answer the wonderful correspondence I receive. When people care enough to write,
the only well-mannered thing to do is to
return the gift, so please indulge me as I
answer some fans here.
From tmz.com
Posted by Sonya in Tx on 4/7/2010,
4:33 P.M.
“When is Tina going to do something
about that hideous scar across her
cheek??”
Dear Sonya in Tx,



Greetings, Texan friend! (I’m assuming the
“Tx” in your screen name stands for Texas
and not some rare chromosomal deficiency
you have. Hope I’m right about that!) First
of all, my apologies for the delayed response. I was unaware you had written until I went on tmz.com to watch some of
their amazing footage of people in L.A.
leaving restaurants and I stumbled upon
your question.
I’m sure if you and I compare schedules we
could find a time to get together and do
something about this scar of mine. But the
trickier question is What am I going to do?
I would love to get your advice, actually.
I’m assuming you’re a physician, because
you seem really knowledgeable about how
the human body works. What do you think
I should do about this hideous scar? I
guess I could wear a bag on my head, but
do I go with linen like the Elephant Man or



a simple brown paper like the Unknown
Comic? Too many choices, help!
Thank you for your time. You are a credit
to Texas and Viking women both.
Yours,
Tina
P.S. Great use of double question marks,
by the way. It makes you seem young.
From Dlisted.com
Posted by Centaurious on Monday,
9/21/2009, 2:08 A.M.
“Tina Fey is an ugly, pear-shaped,
bitchy, overrated troll.”
Dear Centaurious,



First let me say how inspiring it is that you
have learned to use a computer.
I hate for our correspondence to be confrontational, but you have offended me
deeply. To say I’m an overrated troll, when
you have never even seen me guard a
bridge, is patently unfair. I’ll leave it for
others to say if I’m the best, but I am certainly one of the most dedicated trolls
guarding bridges today. I always ask three
questions, at least two of which are riddles.
As for “ugly, pear-shaped, and bitchy”? I
prefer the terms “offbeat, business
class–assed, and exhausted,” but I’ll take
what I can get. There’s no such thing as
bad press!
Now go to bed, you crazy night owl! You
have to be at NASA early in the morning.



So they can look for your penis with the
Hubble telescope.
Affectionately,
Tina
From PerezHilton.com
Posted by jerkstore on Wednesday,
1/21/2009, 11:21 P.M.
“In my opinion Tina Fey completely
ruined SNL. The only reason she’s
celebrated is because she’s a woman
and an outspoken liberal. She has
not a single funny bone in her body.”
Dear jerkstore,
Huzzah for the Truth Teller! Women in
this country have been over-celebrated for
too long. Just last night there was a story



on my local news about a “missing girl,”
and they must have dedicated seven or
eight minutes to “where she was last seen”
and “how she might have been abducted by
a close family friend,” and I thought,
“What is this, the News for Chicks?” Then
there was some story about Hillary Clinton
flying to some country because she’s secretary of state. Why do we keep talking
about these dumdums? We are a society
that constantly celebrates no one but women and it must stop! I want to hear what
the men of the world have been up to.
What fun new guns have they invented?
What are they raping these days? What’s
Michael Bay’s next film going to be?
When I first set out to ruin SNL, I didn’t
think anyone would notice, but I persevered because—like you trying to do a
nine-piece jigsaw puzzle—it was a labor of
love.



I’m not one to toot my own horn, but I feel
safe with you, jerkstore, so I’ll say it.
Everything you ever hated on SNL was by
me, and anything you ever liked was by
someone else who did it against my will.
Sincerely,
Tina Fey
P.S. You know who does have a funny bone
in her body? Your mom every night for a
dollar.
From a bodybuilding forum
Posted by SmarterChild, on 2/24/
2008, 2:10 P.M.
“I’d stick it in her tail pipe.”
Dear SmarterChild,



Thank you so much for your interest.
Whether you meant it in a sexual way or
merely as an act of aggression, I am grateful. As a “woman of a certain age” in this
business, I feel incredibly lucky to still be
“catching your eye” “with my anus.” You
keep me relevant!
Sincerely,
Ms. T. Fey
From tmz.com
Posted by Kevin 214 on 11/9/08,
11:38 A.M.
“Tina Fey CHEATED!!!!!! Anyone
who has ever seen an old picture of
her can see she has had 100% plastic
surgery. Her whole face is different.
She was ugly then and she is ugly



now. She only wished she could ever
be as beautiful as Sarah Palin.”
Dear Kevin 214,
What can I say? You have an amazing eye.
I guess I got caught up in the whole Hollywood thing. I thought I could change a
hundred percent of my facial features and
as long as I stayed ugly, no one would notice. How foolish I was.
So let’s wipe the slate clean. Full disclosure, here is a list of the procedures I’ve had
done. Eye browning, nose lengthening, I
get my teeth lightly henna-ed each month
to give them their amber luster. I’ve had
my lips thinned, and I’ve had a treatment
called Grimmáge where two fishing wires
are run through my jawline and used to
gather the skin until it looks like a fancy
pillow.



I’ve had sebaceous implants (small balls of
Restylane placed in random locations to
give the appearance of youthful neck acne).
I don’t have Botox. Unfortunately I’m allergic. Instead I have monthly injections of
Bromodialone, a farm-strength rat poison.
This keeps my face in a constant state of irritation and paralysis, which of course is
indistinguishable from sexual excitement.
My face is longer and thinner than it was
twenty years ago, and while some might
say that is a natural effect of weight loss
and aging, you and I know the truth—I pay
a woman to sit on the side of my head
twice a week. Madonna and Gwyneth go to
her, and we’ve all had amazing results.
Ugh, listen to me, I really have changed!
Why did I feel the need to name-drop the
fact that I’m friends with Madonna Vickerson and Gwyneth Chung?



Since you’re so savvy at spotting plastic
surgery, I’m sure you’ve noticed some of
my other famous friends who have “had
work done.” Bishop Desmond Tutu… cheek
implants. Supreme Court Judge Ruth
Bader Ginsburg? Major tit job. And
SpongeBob
SquarePants,
gender
reassignment.
Keep on helpin’ me “keep it real,”
T
30 Rock: An Experiment to Confuse
Your Grandparents
If you had told me when I was a kid that I
would grow up to sit through the annual
NBC
Employee Sexual Harassment Seminar
fourteen times, I would have said, “What’s
‘sexual harassment’?”



because Clarence Thomas didn’t invent
that until the early nineties. But I would
have been very excited to hear that I would
spend a large chunk of my adult life working for the Peacock. I love working at NBC.
How could I not? I grew up watching Seinfeld, Johnny Carson, Late Night with
David Letterman, and reruns of The
Mothers-in-Law.
When I was in my eighth season at
Saturday Night Live, it was time to figure
out what the next phase of my life would
be. SNL is like high school, but at least in
high school they tell you when to graduate.
It’s hard to push yourself out of the nest.
Lorne suggested I make a “development
deal” with NBC and try to come up with a
sitcom. A development deal means they
pay you while you’re thinking, which is a
pretty great deal, unless you’re like me and



you feel constant anxiety that you haven’t
thought of anything yet. (My ability to turn
good news into anxiety is rivaled only by
my ability to turn anxiety into chin acne.)
After a few months of getting money for
nothing, I pitched NBC president of Primetime Development Kevin Reilly an idea
about a cable news producer (me, presumably) who is forced to produce the show of
a blowhard right-wing pundit (Alec Baldwin, if we could ever get him) to boost her
network’s sagging ratings. Kevin Reilly
said, “No, thank you.” All of a sudden this
development deal thing didn’t seem so bad.
If I could get turned down one or two more
times, I could keep the development
money but never have to make a show. But
then I’d probably also never work again,
and I have a very competitive and obedient
nature, so… chin acne and rewrites.



Kevin Reilly suggested for my next idea
that I write something closer to my life.
“Why not write about what it’s like to work
at SNL?” I was reluctant because it seemed
self-indulgent to write about the show directly. I had really liked the cable news
pitch because I liked the idea of writing
Alec Baldwin as a powerful conservative,
having him articulate passionately the opposite of everything he believed in real life.
My husband, always more clearheaded
about these things, suggested that I just
keep Alec’s character the same. Then I
started thinking that if it was a show business story, I could use Tracy Morgan, too.
A triangle between me, Alec Baldwin, and
Tracy Morgan felt like it had potential.
These three characters would have completely different views about any topic that
came up—race, gender, politics, workplace
ethics,
money,
sex,
women’s



basketball—and they would agree and disagree in endless combinations.
By 2005 I had fleshed out the idea Kevin
Reilly had requested. I would play the head
writer of a late-night comedy show. Tracy
Morgan would play a lunatic comedy star
and Alec Baldwin would play my overbearing conservative boss. Well, it was written
for Alec Baldwin, but none of us had the
balls to talk to him about it yet.
I wrote what they call a “pilot,” which
means you write the first episode of what
you hope will be a long series. Pilot scripts
are particularly difficult to write because
you have to introduce all the characters
without it feeling like a series of introductions. You have to tell a story that’s not
only funny and compelling but also dramatizes your main characters’ points of view
and what the series would be about



thematically (love, work, investigating sexy
child murders in Miami, etc.).
If you want to see a great pilot, watch the
first episode of Cheers. It’s charming,
funny, and well constructed. If you want to
see an awkward, sweaty pilot episode,
watch 30 Rock. I will not be joining you,
because I never want to watch that mess
again. (The 30 Rock writing staff have
asked me to stop saying the pilot was terrible, so from here on out I will refer to it
as “quirky and unique.”) I met with several
excellent actors about playing the role of
Jack Donaghy, and with each meeting it
became increasingly clear that the part was
meant for Alec Baldwin. But I didn’t have
to work up the nerve to talk to him about it
yet, because now I was pregnant and the
shooting of the pilot was postponed.



In September, my daughter was born. (For
the record: epidural, vaginal delivery, did
not poop on the table.) Around Christmastime I was back to work at SNL, and Alec
was hosting. The show was good that week
and Alec was having a good time. Lorne
and I looked at each other—should we just
ask him?
Lorne asked him and Alec said yes. I stayed
out of the room, which is my specialty.
An Auspicious Beginning
NBC executives must have seen something
of value in my quirky and unique pilot
(Alec Baldwin) because they decided for
some reason (Alec Baldwin) to “pick it up.”
This means they agreed to make eleven
more episodes and maybe show them on
TV.



The announcement of which shows are
picked up each year takes place in May at
an advertisers’
convention called the “Upfronts.” Ad buyers from all kinds of companies gather in
New York City for a week. Each day one of
the networks presents its “new fall lineup”
of shows. They rent out Radio City Music
Hall or the Hilton ballroom and try to
dazzle the advertisers with exciting clips
and personal appearances from their
biggest stars. They talk about which “target
demographics” they reach and how many
“upscale” viewers they have. It is sexy, like
having-lunch-with-your-parents-after-amedical-exam sexy.
The advertisers then decide where they
want to spend their ad money, and the networks know how much money they’ll have
to work with in the fall.



We have now exceeded my understanding
of the television business.
Right before the 2006 Upfronts, I was
called into Lorne Michaels’s office at two in
the morning after an SNL show. “This is
it,” I thought. “They’ve come to tell us they
want the show.” I don’t know why I was so
confident they would (Alec Baldwin).
I had mixed feelings about this. I now had
an eight month old at home, and I wasn’t
sure that this new seventy-hour-a-week job
was, as disgraced politicians say, “in the
best interest of my family at this current
juncture at the present time.”
I was a little excited but mostly blorft.
“Blorft” is an adjective I just made up that
means



“Completely overwhelmed but proceeding
as if everything is fine and reacting to the
stress with the torpor of a possum.” I have
been blorft every day for the past seven
years.
I went into Lorne’s office to receive my
good news, but something was up. The
CEO of NBC
Universal Television Group, Jeff Zucker,
was there, and he seemed agitated. Apparently, with all my business savvy, I hadn’t
realized that Alec Baldwin had not signed
up for any episodes beyond the pilot.
NBC wanted Alec to sign a new contract
before any announcements were made, but
Alec, being one of the all-time great Irish
ballbusters, would not be rushed.



(Alec and I like to joke now about what I
call his “Irish Negotiating Technique,”
which usually boils down to his saying:
“They offered me more money and I told
them to go f*** themselves.”) So Mr. Zucker was being forced to order a show that
did not actually have its star in place. He
paced around the room. Lorne calmly assured him it would all work out; Alec
would eventually sign his contract. Then
Lorne waved his hand gently in front of
Zucker’s face and said, “These are not the
droids you’re looking for.” He didn’t, but
he might as well have.
“We’re really going out on a limb for you
here,” Jeff Zucker said, wagging his finger
at me begrudgingly. “You’re picked up.”
And then, in a most unfortunate Freudian
slip, I said, “You’re welcome” instead of
“Thank you.” And that was the glorious



becoming of what would go on to be the
102nd most popular show on television.*
Assembling
Assassins

a

Team

of

Ragtag

Alec did eventually sign his contract, and
we started production that August.
My friend and former SNL coworker
Robert Carlock had moved with his wife
and baby from California to New York to
be an executive producer and co–head
writer on the show. We surrounded
ourselves with hardworking, funny people.
My
Bossypants
Techniques

Managerial

I’ll admit that as a female producer I have
a tacit “no hotheads” policy. For years, to
be considered a genius at comedy, people
had
to
be
“dangerous”
and



“unpredictable.” I have met some very
dangerous, erratic, funny people over the
years, people I admire, but I don’t want to
work with them every day. Go do your
own show, tough guys, and I will gladly
watch it from the safety of my home. I hire
the most talented of the people who are
the least likely to throw a punch in the
workplace. If this is contributing to the
Demasculinization of America, I say hold
a telethon and let me know how it goes. I
don’t ever want to get punched in the face
over a joke—or even screamed at.
These were those gentle people:
Jack Burditt—a TV veteran who had
worked on every show from Mad About
You to Frasier to DAG. A handsome, softspoken, Gary Cooper type, I don’t think
Jack said a word the first four weeks.



When he finally spoke, it was during a
mundane conversation in the writers’ room
about crappy summer jobs we’d had as
teenagers. Jack laughed as he told how at
eighteen he was operating the roller-coaster at Magic Mountain and how one night,
there was a riot in the park after a disco
concert and six people got stabbed. One
guy bled out in front of him. Then he
turned in a thoughtful and hilarious 30
Rock script that showed he was more than
just a former carnie who had watched a
man die. A couple months later he spoke
again to tell us how he had once bought a
bunch of depth charges and thrown them
off the side of a rowboat in Mexico. Also,
he believes his torn ACL was healed by a
visit to Roswell. And once he fainted in
front of Ringo Starr from an undiagnosed
testicle infection. Jack’s stories were reason enough to keep him around; his elegant
scripts were just a bonus. MVP episode:



204, “Rosemary’s Baby.” MVP joke: this
piece of Jack Donaghy wisdom.
LIZ
Oh, thank God. It was terrible. I went to
her apartment. I don’t think she has a toilet. I saw my future, Jack.
Jack pours Liz a drink and hands it to her.
JACK
Never go with a hippie to a second
location.
Kay Cannon was a woman I’d known from
the Chicago improv world. A beautiful,
strong midwestern gal who had played lots
of sports and run track in college, Kay had
submitted a good writing sample, but I was
more impressed by her athlete’s approach
to the world. She had a can-do attitude, a



willingness to learn through practice, and
she was comfortable being coached. Her
success at the show is a testament to why
all parents should make their daughters
pursue team sports instead of pageants.
Not that Kay couldn’t win a beauty pageant—she could, as long as for the talent
competition she could sing a karaoke version of “Redneck Woman” while shooting a
Nerf rifle. MVP joke: Tracy Jordan admonishing a pigeon for eating out of the
garbage.
C.C.
(giving in)
No one can know we’re together, Jack. Not
even your friend Tracy Jordan out there.
JACK



I don’t think we have to worry about Tracy.
CUT TO: Tracy in front of the building,
talking to a pigeon.
TRACY
Stop eating people’s old french fries, little
pigeon. Have some self-respect. Don’t you
know you can fly?
Dave Finkel and Brett Baer were a writing
team from LA, and I’m proud to say that
during that first year they contributed
some of our weirdest material. MVP episode: 118, “Fireworks,” in which Tracy finds
out he is a descendant of Thomas Jefferson. MVP scene: Tracy, anxious over this
change in his racial identity, dreams that
he is on a paternity test episode of The
Maury Povich Show with Thomas



Jefferson. Played, for dream-logic and financial reasons, by Alec Baldwin.

MAURY POVICH
Sally Hemings just called you a dog, Thomas Jefferson.
THOMAS JEFFERSON



I don’t care. This is about Tracy. I rode a
horse all the way from Heaven to tell him
something.
There was Matt Hubbard, a baby-faced
Harvard boy who always wanted to order
McDonald’s for staff lunch, which I liked a
lot. Matt and his wife sublet a place on the
Upper East Side of Manhattan that turned
out to have bedbugs. This kind of deep human suffering, in combination with his
highly processed diet, transformed him into a joke-writing superhero. MVP episode:
115, “Hardball.” MVP
joke: Tracy Jordan on food.
KENNETH
Hello there, Mr. Jordan! Mr. Slattery, Mr.
Oppenheim. I’ve picked up your lunch
from Sylvia’s.



Extra cornbread, because I know you like
it.
TRACY
Like it? I love it! I love that cornbread so
much I want to take it out behind the
middle school and get it pregnant!
There was Daisy Gardner, a delicate soul
with a nervous stomach who pitched some
of the filthiest jokes you could imagine, in
the gentlest voice you could imagine. MVP
episode: 116, “The Source Awards,” in
which Jack Donaghy tries to recover from
the failure of his foul-tasting wine, Donaghy Estates, by trying to market it to the
hip-hop community as a replacement for
Cristal. MVP
joke: rapper Ghostface Killah trying to swig
Donaghy Estates during a music video.



GHOSTFACE KILLAH (CONT’D)
’CAUSE I GET RAW AND TAKE NAMES/
JUST LIKE LEBRON JAMES/AND
DONAGHY KINDA RHYMES
WITH PARTY/WHICH IS COOL –
He takes another sip, reacts, disgusted.
GHOSTFACE KILLAH (CONT’D)
I gotta take a break. I can’t drink any more
of this. My tummy hurts!
The Lord sent me John Riggi, who upon
first meeting looked like an angry longshoreman in a denim jacket and a skullcap,
but turned out to be a sensitive Italian boy
from Cincinnati and an excellent cook.
MVP episode: 104, “Blind Date.” MVP
joke:



LIZ
You mean Gretchen Thomas? The brilliant
plastics engineer-slash-lesbian?
(off his puzzled look)
What made you think I was gay?
JACK
Your shoes.
Liz looks down at her shoes. They are
pretty borderline.
LIZ
Well, I’m straight.
JACK
Those shoes are bi-curious.



Our youngest writer was Donald Glover.
He had just graduated from NYU’s writing
program and was still living in a dorm and
working as an RA. Donald was our only
African American writer at the time, but
his real diversity was that he was our only
“cool young person” who could tell us what
the “kids were listening to these days.”
Also, because he came from a large family
in Georgia, he was very helpful in writing
for the character Kenneth the Page. MVP
joke: a scene where Jenna (Jane
Krakowski) is trying to teach Kenneth
(Jack McBrayer) how to brag about himself
in a passive-aggressive way.
JENNA
Not even a “back door” brag?
KENNETH



What’s a “back door” brag?
JENNA
It’s sneaking something wonderful about
yourself into everyday conversation. Like
when I tell people, “It’s hard for me to
watch ‘American Idol,’ because I have perfect pitch.”
KENNETH
Oh… ew.
JENNA
Now you try.
KENNETH
It’s hard for me to watch “American Idol”
’cause there’s a water bug on my channel
changer.



It’s hard for me to pinpoint what I like
most about that joke. Is it that Kenneth is
truly incapable of bragging? The revelation
that Kenneth’s apartment is crawling with
water bugs? No, I think it’s the use of the
grandmotherly
expression
“channel
changer.”
As for Robert Carlock, his strengths are
erudite references, absurd joke constructions, and White Male Malaise in a multicultural world. MVP episodes: 105, “Jacktor”; 215, “Sandwich Day”; 310,
“Generalissimo”; 416, “Apollo, Apollo.”
MVP joke: too many to name, but the character that flows from him the most freely is
Dr. Leo Spaceman (Chris Parnell). At the
end of season 1, Jack suffers a heart attack.
His unscrupulous showbiz doctor comes
out to the waiting room to give Liz, Jack’s



mother (Elaine Stritch), and Jack’s fiancée
(Emily Mortimer) a prognosis.
Dr. Spaceman enters from I.C.U. His lab
coat is covered in blood. The women all
gasp.
DR. SPACEMAN
What, this? No, no, I was at a costume
party earlier this evening… and the hostess’s dog attacked me so I had to stab it.
Perhaps the Carlockian worldview is best
summed up by this exchange from a recent
episode, when Tracy arrives at the hospital
just after the birth of his daughter.
TRACY (O.C.) (CONT’D)
Why is the baby covered in goop?!
DR. SPACEMAN (O.C.)



Because everything
disgusting!

about

this

is

Taking the World by Storm! (Storm
Downgraded to Light Rain by
Weather Experts)
We premiered on Wednesday, October 11,
2006, at 8:00 P.M. and we were an instant
hit—like figs for dessert or bringing your
guitar out at a party. We were New Coke!
We were not a hit.
But we barreled ahead knowing that we’d
at least come out of this with DVDs to
show our friends. The story ideas came fast
and furious in the beginning. “What if
Tracy went off his medication and started
hallucinating a little blue dude everywhere?” Sure. “What if Jenna was in a
movie called The Rural Juror and no one



could understand her when she said the
title?” Fine. “What if we do a story about
Liz being called a cunt?” Why wouldn’t we?
That had happened to me plenty!*
You know that saying “Dance as if no one is
watching”? Well, that’s what we were doing. We were dancing with abandon, and
no one was watching. Actually, about five
and a half million people were watching,
but that counts as nothing. In my Chicago
theater days, the rule was there had to be
more people in the audience than on the
stage or we cancelled the show. Although
once I did a two-woman play called Ironmistress for an audience of two. So five
million people seemed pretty good to me.
But back when Friends was in its prime,
they had about twenty-five million viewers.
We were in jeopardy.



I don’t think Robert Carlock unpacked his
suitcase that whole first year. He probably
didn’t even buy full gallons of milk, assuming we’d be cancelled any minute and he’d
have to chug the whole thing and get back
on the plane to Los Angeles.
I proceeded with the blithe confidence of a
moron. I was the baby in the movie Baby’s
Day Out, toddling down the street, completely unaware that an anvil had just
fallen behind me.* Conversely, every time
the office phone rang, Robert put his coat
on. That was the burden of his higher
intelligence.
We worked incredibly hard that first year,
and every year since. Carlock and I can’t
believe we used to complain about the
hours at SNL, which now seem like a cakewalk. Especially for me, because that’s all I
did my first two years at SNL: walk around



and look for cake. For context, I’ve attached a chart that shows the relative
stress levels of various jobs.
Jeff Zucker and NBC president of Primetime Development Kevin Reilly proved to
be real champions of the show. We started
making jokes about NBC and its then parent company, GE, almost immediately. We
didn’t have anything against GE or even
really know anything about GE, but we had
painted ourselves into a corner by making
it Jack Donaghy’s workplace in the show.
When Carlock got a call one day from a woman in the GE Legal Department disputing
the accuracy of a GE mention in one of our
scripts, we were confused and nervous.
Why does the parent company have our
scripts? Is this going to happen every
week? Don’t they know I’m the baby from
Baby’s Day Out? Apparently it was Mr.



Zucker who personally intervened and explained to his more corporate peers that
these were just jokes and we were to be left
alone. Maybe he assumed we’d be dead
soon. Whatever the reason, I appreciate
NBC for letting us make jokes about them
all the time. I don’t think ABC or CBS
would stand for that abuse, and I’ll probably never find out.



Doing, Learning, Dying
We shoot 30 Rock on film, like a little
movie each week. This means that we film
every line of dialogue about five times from
about five different angles. Every time we
switch angles it takes about twenty
minutes to move the cameras around.
Every five minutes the cameras run out of
film and we have to reload. If someone’s
getting on our fake elevator in a scene, it
usually takes an extra five tries to have the
elevator door close at the right time. You
don’t even want to know what happens if
there’s a dog, cat, parrot, baby, or peacock
in the shot. And worst of all, our cast and
crew like one another and enjoy lively conversations. All this jocularity adds up to
about fourteen hours a day.



(If we shot on this newfangled hi-def video
it would go faster, but we would look like
the zombie backup dancers in Thriller.)
We only shoot in this “single camera” style
because it is currently the fashion. Classic
shows like Frasier, Everybody Loves Raymond, and Seinfeld were shot “multi-camera” in front of an audience. I’m pretty sure
it took about three hours a week. I don’t
know why the network’s taste changed to
single-camera shows, but there’s no bucking fashion trends. If that were possible, I’d
still be wearing this amazing pair of light
blue jeans I owned in college that had four
built-in belts across the front.
That first season when we shot on location
in Manhattan, people would stop to watch
before realizing we were not Sex and the
City, when they would leave immediately. I
learned a lot about acting that year. What I



learned about Film Acting is that it’s
mostly about not standing in other people’s
light, and remembering what hand you had
your papers in. When you do your “offcamera” lines for someone, you try to put
your head real close to the camera. That’s
about it. You’re a trained film actor now.
Anything I learned about Real Acting I
learned from watching Alec Baldwin. By
Real Acting I mean “an imitation of human
behavior that is both emotionally natural
and mechanically precise enough as to elicit tears or laughter from humans.” Alec is
a master of both Film Acting and Real
Acting.
He can play the emotion at the core of a
scene—he is falling in love, his mother is
torturing him, his mentor has been reincarnated as a peacock—while reciting long
speeches word for word and hitting all the



jokes with the right rhythm. You would be
surprised how many major Oscar-winning
movie stars cannot do this. There are only
about nine people in the world who can do
this; maybe three more that we don’t know
about in North Korea.
Alec knows how to let the camera come to
him. He can convey a lot with a small
movement of his eyes. He speaks so quietly
sometimes that I can barely hear him when
I’m standing next to him, but when you
watch the film back, it’s all there.
It may not have made me a better actor,
but at least now I know why what I’m doing is terrible.
After each fourteen-hour acting class was
over, I would meet up with five or six
writers at my apartment to catch up on
what they had written during the day.



During those early days we’d order food
and work until one or two in the morning.
My husband, Jeff, sat in what was meant to
be a pantry and wrote music to score the
show. We kept a video baby monitor next
to the computer screen, and I could watch
my daughter sleeping while we worked. I
would excuse myself occasionally to
change a diaper in the night. Usually for
the baby. These will definitely be my happiest memories of this time, because
everything I cared about was within ten
feet of me. One night I put my daughter to
bed, worked with the writers all night, and
in the morning when she toddled out, the
writers were still there. It was the best
worst thing ever.
Another night to remember: Around three
A.M., Carlock and I were leading a rewrite
in my living room and realized that we had
both fallen asleep while talking. When we



woke up a few moments (or hours?) later,
the other writers were just sitting politely,
awaiting further instruction. That is a dedicated staff.
The only downside was that the next day’s
work began at six A.M. In spite of the exhaustion, I am proud to say I lost my cool
only once, in my kitchen. “It’s too much.
It’s just too much work,” I sobbed to my
husband. Please refer to the Coal Mining
and Military Service sections of Chart A for
perspective.
I turned to domestic violence only once.
We were going to bed at three A.M., knowing we’d have to get back up at five thirty
A.M., and my husband kept talking and
talking as a joke when I was trying to fall
asleep. His exhaustion had given him the
giggles, and he kept poking me and waking
me up saying things like “Hey, I gotta ask



you one more thing. Do you like pretzels?”
I flew off my pillow and shoved him so
hard across the bed that I saw genuine fear
flash across his face. It was one of the very
few “deleted scenes from Star 80” in my
life.
There is one other embarrassing secret I
must reveal, something I’ve never admitted
to anyone.
Though we are grateful for the affection 30
Rock has received from critics and hipsters, we were actually trying to make a hit
show. We weren’t trying to make a lowrated critical darling that snarled in the
face of conventionality. We were trying to
make Home Improvement and we did it
wrong. You know those scientists who were
developing a blood-pressure medicine and
they accidentally invented Viagra? We



were trying to make Viagra and we ended
up with blood-pressure medicine.
No matter how many times we tried to
course-correct the show to make it more
accessible—slow the dialogue down, tell
fewer stories per episode, stop putting
people in blackface—the show would end
up careening off the rails again. In my limited experience, shows are like children.
You can teach them manners and dress
them in little sailor suits, but in the end,
they’re going to be who they’re going to be.
By episode eleven 30 Rock had really
found its voice, and it was the voice of a
crazy person. The episode ended up being
called “Black Tie,” but while we were
shooting we referred to it as “Good-bye,
America.” We were coming to the end of
our initial order and there was no sign of
our being picked up again. The other



reason we were calling it “Good-bye, America” was because this episode was nuts. If
we had any concern that the show was too
weird to succeed, we certainly weren’t
helping ourselves with this one. The main
story of the episode is that Alec’s character,
Jack Donaghy, attends a birthday party for
his friend, an inbred Austrian prince
named Gerhardt Hapsburg.
Gerhardt Hapsburg was played by Paul
Reubens, the genius known to most as Peewee Herman.
Paul committed deeply to his role. He
chose to wear fake teeth and pale makeup,
and he had one tiny ivory hand (years before Kristen Wiig’s tiny hands on SNL, our
writers would want me to point out). In
case you were wondering if 30 Rock would
ever be a commercial hit, look at this
picture.



In the story, Jenna (Jane Krakowski) is determined to “Grace Kelly” herself by meeting and marrying Gerhardt and becoming a
princess. This culminates in a scene where
she dances for the prince.
Jane danced (like no one was watching) as
Paul improvised, calling out different
dance styles: “Jazz! Tap!
Jitterbug! Charleston! Interpretive! Twirl!
Twirl again! Keep twirling!” After he



professes his love for Jenna and she reciprocates, Gerhardt takes a sip of celebratory
champagne, knowing that it will kill him
because his malformed body cannot metabolize grapes. He dies immediately. This
was our best attempt at writing a sitcom.
Poor Gerhardt serves as a metaphor for the
show itself—strange but not stupid, desperate to be loved but abhorrent to most. A
proud member of an aristocracy that no
longer existed—network television.
Some Unsolicited Theories About
Television
Gerhardt’s picture leads me to something
else I’d like to acknowledge, which is what
a human-looking cast we are. Sure, Alec
has a movie star face and Jane is leggy and
blond, but the cumulative age of our series
regulars is 210, and even the African



Americans among us are pretty pasty. I
personally like a cast with a lot of differentshaped faces and weird little bodies and a
diverse array of weak chins, because it
helps me tell the characters apart. When
actors are too good-looking, I can’t memorize them. For example, I have never seen
a picture of Sienna Miller where I didn’t
say, “That girl’s pretty. Who is that?”
For years the networks have tried to re-create the success of Friends by making pilot
after pilot about beautiful twentysomethings living together in New York.
Beautiful twenty-somethings living in Los
Angeles. Beautiful twenty-somethings investigating sexy child murders in Miami.
This template never works, because executives refuse to realize that Friends was the
exception, not the rule. The stars of beloved shows like Cheers, Frasier, Seinfeld,



Newhart, and The Dick Van Dyke Show
had normal human faces. And that’s what
some of the people on our show have.
When you watched Sanford and Son, you
didn’t want to have sex with everybody you
saw, just Grady. I’ve never understood why
every character being “hot” was necessary
for enjoying a TV show. It’s the same reason I don’t get Hooters. Why do we need to
enjoy chicken wings and boobies at the
same time? Yes, they are a natural and
beautiful part of the human experience.
And so are boobies. But why at the same
time? Going to the bathroom is part of life,
but we wouldn’t go to a restaurant that had
toilets for seats… or would we? Excuse me
while I call my business manager.
He said it’s a “nonstarter.” They already
have that in Japan.



The week after “Good-bye America,” we
shot episode twelve, which was called “The
Baby Show.” It was officially the last show
of our order. Members of our crew were
calling around looking for their next job.
On set, people started eyeing the furniture,
wondering what it would go for in the Cancellation Fire Sale.
Don Fey happened to be visiting the set
that last week when Kevin Reilly called to
say that we were picked up for the rest of
the season. I may never know why they
chose to keep the show going (Alec Baldwin), but my proudest moment as an adult
was walking back onto the soundstage and
telling everyone they still had jobs. (My
proudest moment as a child was the time I
beat my uncle Pierre at Scrabble with the
seven-letter word FARTING.)



By March, the first season of 30 Rock was
complete. (For the record: no epidural,
group vaginal delivery, did not poop on the
table.) That September we won the Emmy
for Outstanding Comedy Series.
Now, I know I’m not saying anything that
hasn’t been said hundreds of times, but 30
Rock is the perfect symbol for the pro-life
movement in America. Here’s this little
show that no one thought would make it.
I’m sure NBC considered getting rid of it,
but by the time we won the Emmy, they
were too far along.
As the mother of this now five-year-old
show, would I still rather have a big, strong
Two and a Half Men than our sickly little
program? No, I would not, because I love
my weird little show. I think this show was
put on earth to teach me patience and
compassion.



“The Days Are Long and the Years
Are Short”
—Stay-at-Home
Workers

Moms

and

Sex

Now that we’ve finished season 5, it’s time
to start shopping for parachutes again. Rob
Reiner was a guest on the show this year,
and he went out of his way to tell us all to
appreciate this job. Jobs like this are special and they don’t last forever. No need to
remind me, Michael Stivic. I have seen my
future, and it is a weight-loss game show
on Lifetime. And I don’t even win.
Here are answers to some FAQ
about 30 Rock:
Q: Is Alec Baldwin really leaving show
business?



A: I don’t know, but we do have a contingency plan: a slightly out of focus Billy
Baldwin.
Q: Is Tracy Morgan as wild and crazy as his
character?
A: There’s only one way for you to find out.
Drive across country with him in a Prius.
Q: Will Jack and Liz ever “hook up”?
A: In spite of their “Sam and Diane” sparring, their relationship will remain more
like “Norm and Cliff”—making out while
drunk and then denying it.
Q: When is it on, again?
A: Thursdays at either 10:00 or 8:30 or…
you know what? Just DVR it.
Q: Where did you find Grizz and Dotcom?



A: Grizz and Dotcom were born adorable
and fully clothed and found nestled in a
field. They were the inspiration for the
Cabbage Patch dolls and the Cabbage
Patch dance.
Q: When are we gonna see more of Pete
and the writers?
A: Season 9.
Q: Has Tracy Morgan ever French-kissed
an NBC executive?
A: Yes, but only at an official NBC event,
and only against her will.
Q: Is Jack McBrayer really like his
character?
A: No, Jack’s character is a simple farm
boy from Stone Mountain, Georgia. Jack
himself would be useless on a farm, and



he’s from the bank-robbery and teen-sexscandal metropolis of Conyers, Georgia.
Q: How come Liz Lemon talks so much
about food and overeating but she’s not
fat?
A: The character Liz Lemon has a rare condition
called
“orophasmia,”
where
everything she eats immediately falls out
her bottom like a ghost. This was established in episode 219, “The One About Liz’s
Orophasmia,” in the roller-coaster scene
with Emmy-nominated guest star Marisa
Tomei.
Q: Is 30 Rock the most racist show on
television?
A: No, in my opinion it’s NFL football.
Why do they portray all those guys as murderers and rapists?



Q: How many janitors work at TGS, the fictional show within the show?
A: We have established eight distinct janitorial characters. Joe, Subhas, Old Janitor,
Rolly, Khonani, Euzebia, Rosa, and Jadwiga. Action figures are in the works.
Sarah, Oprah, and Captain Hook, or
How to Succeed by Sort of Looking
Like Someone
I would never have made it into the cast of
Saturday Night Live if I’d had to go about
it in the regular way. When people audition
for the show, they have to stand on the historic SNL home base stage and try to get a
laugh from the four or five stone-cold
strangers watching them. They have to
demonstrate their funny characters and
voices, of which I have none. My own child
could tell you that my “funny voices” are



completely derivative and my Mr. Smee
impression sounds nothing like the guy in
the movie.
I ended up on TV because Lorne Michaels
likes to promote from within. When he had
to choose who would replace David Letterman in Late Night on NBC, he picked unknown former SNL writer Conan O’Brien.
When it was time to pick new anchors for
Weekend Update in 1999, he did a nationwide talent search that went all the way
across the hall. He let one of the head
writers of the show—me—do a screen test
with cast member Jimmy Fallon. By the
time I tested for the show, I had already
worked there for three years. I wasn’t intimidated by anyone in the room, and I
already had a day job at the show to fall
back on. I didn’t have to do characters, just
read jokes without messing up.



The timing of the Weekend Update
turnover was, at that point in my life, the
luckiest, craziest thing that had ever
happened to me.
In rehearsing for the screen test, I realized
that I couldn’t see the cue cards. I’ve worn
glasses to see far away since I was twentyone, but I only need them for a few activities, like going to the movies, finding Orion’s belt, and reading cue cards. So I went
to the doctor and got my first pair of contact lenses. The day of the screen test I
spent about twenty-five minutes nervously
trying to get the lenses onto my eyeballs.
Right up until camera time, I was sweaty
and green from having to touch my own
eyeballs like that. If you’ve never had to do
it, I’d say it’s not quite as quease-making as
when you lose your tampon string, but
equally queasish to a self–breast exam. If
you are male, I would liken it to touching



your own eyeball, and thank you for buying
this book.
Jimmy and I did a screen test, as did a
bunch of other people in the cast and several comics from the outside world. Because Jimmy was a star and Lorne felt that
I would make sure the writing of the segment got done, Jimmy and I got the job.

We did another camera test for set and
lighting. Less than eager to touch my own
eyeballs again, I just wore my glasses the
second time around. After the test, the
great comedy writer and chronicler of human perversions T. Sean Shannon came up



to me and said in his Texas drawl, “You
should leave them glasses on, sister.” And
so, a commonplace librarian fetish was embraced for profit.
Once I was hired to do Update, every now
and then the writers would put me in a
sketch. This usually happened only if all
the other women were already in the
sketch and they had run out of bodies.
But they didn’t use me much, because I
could never really look like anybody else.
Molly Shannon has a great face for wigs.
Her features are delicate and symmetrical,
and her coloring is neutral enough that she
can play a blond Courtney Love or ravenhaired Monica Lewinsky and you buy it.
Maya Rudolph’s face can change from
Donatella Versace to Beyoncé in a minute
and seventeen seconds. I always just look
like me, in a wig. (See below pictures of me



not resembling Dina Lohan, Janice Dickinson, or Barbara Pierce Bush.)
The closest I ever came to looking like anyone else was when they tried to dress me
up like a bearded lady from the circus and I
looked just like my brother. It has
something to do with the fact that my eyes
and eyebrows are very dark but my skin is
very pale and my nose is kind of long. I was
absolutely useless when it came to being a
look-alike.
So You Can Imagine My Surprise…
So you can imagine my surprise on August
29, 2008, when my husband called me into
the room to watch CNN. John McCain had
selected first-term Alaska governor Sarah
Palin as his running mate, and two things
were obvious right away. One, this was a
craven attempt to lure Hillary voters away



from Obama, and two—“She kind of looks
like you,” my husband said. I scoffed. It
was just that she had brown hair and
glasses. But the e-mails started coming,
from friends and cousins and coworkers.
People seemed to think we really looked
alike. The most powerful minds in the
world—cable news anchors and Internet
users—started speculating as to whether I
would play her on Saturday Night Live.
We had already done two full seasons of 30
Rock and were just beginning to shoot season 3. If I had been wondering whether
people were aware of the new show, the
answer was now clear; they were not. No
one had even noticed that I didn’t work at
Saturday Night anymore. Also, no one
seemed to remember that when I did work
there, I only did the news. They didn’t care.
They were in a blind frenzy. “Brown hair!
Glasses!”



In a Shocking Turn of Events…
In a shocking turn of events, Oprah Winfrey had expressed the slightest polite interest in being on 30 Rock. Desperate to
find a larger audience, we jumped at this
chance like meth heads over a cough syrup
counter. Robert Carlock wrote a hilarious
script where Liz Lemon meets Oprah on a
plane. (You can buy it on iTunes!) We sent
the script to some women at Harpo, who
told us that Oprah liked it and they were
sure she would do it. We were ecstatic. As
the summer wore on, however, it became
clear that Oprah had not actually seen the
script. In late August, Oprah’s chief of staff
(I am not joking) had called to say that
Oprah was really sorry but she would not
be able to do the show. This was planned
as our second episode of the season, and
Oprah was irreplaceable in it. We had
already shot half the episode. If this fell



apart now, it would cost the show hundreds of thousands of dollars. I had the
nerve-racking task of getting on the phone
with Ms. Winfrey and trying to talk her into it. I am terribly, terribly suited for such
jobs. I’m shy and have no salesmanship—I
am actually able to convey sweaty palms
over the phone. I didn’t try to sell Ms. Winfrey on the comedy of the episode; instead
I appealed to her knowledge of television
schedules and how royally cornholed we’d
be if she declined. She listened, because
she is smart and generous. She agreed to
let us do a rewrite of the script and consider it, but I knew that until that Oprah
footage was “in the can,” I would carry
around a very specific form of physical
anxiety that feels kind of like my heart
shrinking up like a raisin.
Meanwhile, Across Town…



Meanwhile, across town, the staff of
Saturday Night Live was preparing to start
their season early, on September 13, to
cover this very important national election.
The show is always exciting during election
years and has proven its political relevance
time and time again over its thirty-fiveyear run. (I have to include sentences like
that because I’m trying to get college credit
for this.) On September 3, 2008, then governor Palin accepted the vice presidential
nomination. Around this same time, Oprah
formally agreed to be on 30 Rock, and it
was determined that my daughter’s thirdbirthday party would have a Peter Pan
theme. Each of these events was equally
important in my life.
Lorne and I discussed the overwhelming
public opinion (hyperbole) that I should
play Governor Palin. Apparently, that
morning both Lorne’s doorman and Robert



De Niro had stopped him to say how uncanny the resemblance was. Did we dare
disappoint Frank the Doorman and Robert
De Niro?
Lorne and I shared the same hesitation: If
everyone in the world had the same casting
idea, it couldn’t possibly be a good idea,
right? When you work at SNL, people come
up to you all the time and say stuff like
“You know what you should do? A skit
about my brother-in-law,” or “You should
do a skit where Tiger Woods and Obama
are gay for each other.” Or “That show
hasn’t been good since the seventies.”
People always have lots of opinions about
the show and they’re never right, so why
would they be right now?
But Lorne is also an old-school producer,
and somewhere deep down I think he knew
that if he cast me in the part “by popular



demand,” even if I sucked, it might be a
good rating. A good rating is a good rating,
even if people tune in just to be mad about
how much it sucked.
We decided not to decide. This is another
technique I’d learned from Lorne. Sometimes if you have a difficult decision to
make, just stall until the answer presents
itself.
Back at 30 Rock…
Back at 30 Rock we scheduled our shooting
day with Miss Oprah Winfrey. She generously offered to fly in on Saturday, September 13, to pick up her scenes. This was perfect. I could safely plan my daughter’s
party for Sunday the 14th. The only remaining problem was that I could not find
Peter Pan plates or cups. You can find
Tinkerbell or Captain Hook, but no Peter



Pan. Was Disney in some kind of legal conflict with the J. M. Barrie estate? There was
no time to get involved in that! I had less
than a week! Captain Hook cups mixed
with Tinkerbell plates would have to
suffice.
It was four days until the season premiere
of SNL and still no decision from Lorne. I
was walking around the 30 Rock offices
telling everyone that I couldn’t possibly
play Palin—I was too busy and I didn’t do
impressions and it’s important to say no
sometimes and I couldn’t possibly commit
to it—but in the back of my head, I was
very aware that no one had actually asked
me to do it. “Has he called you yet? Has he
called you yet?” my friends were asking.
Nope. I slumped against my locker and
twirled my ponytail.



I had arrogantly thought it was all about
me and whether I felt like doing it, but of
course it was Lorne’s decision to make and
not mine. It’s his show.
Still trying to control the situation, I called
Lorne’s office on Wednesday evening after
their read-through and left a message to
say I didn’t want to play Palin, should it
come up. My call was not returned.
On Wednesday night, Alice and I drew a
picture of Peter Pan to hang up at the
party. I explained to her the apparent licensing problem with the plates. She was
understanding and suggested we relax by
pretending to be Wendy and a mermaid for
the next sixty-five minutes.
On Thursday, Oprah’s office checked in to
say that she had heard I might be doing
Saturday Night Live that Saturday and



would I rather reschedule her shoot? No,
no, no! Get the “O” in the can, for the sake
of my heart raisin.
Thursday morning I checked the status of
my Amazon.com order. The birthday
present I had ordered was not here yet. I
also started peeking at YouTube clips of
Sarah Palin. How hard could that voice be?
On Thursday evening, Lorne called to say
that Seth Meyers had written a piece and I
should come over late Friday evening and
rehearse it with Amy and if it didn’t feel
right, someone else would do it.
I rambled through my concerns. Kristen
Wiig would be better at it. (Lorne agreed.)
I felt that whatever I appeared in, people
would assume that I wrote it and that it
was expressing my personal opinions.
These were delusions of grandeur, of



course; remember, no one even noticed
that I had quit.
Regardless, I didn’t want to be a stock
character that any writer on the staff could
make use of. I didn’t want, for example, to
play Sarah Palin in a sketch about how Hillary Clinton was a jealous dyke or
something.
Also, I was skittish to do political comedy
after getting myself into trouble a few
months before.
My Mouth Goes into Politics. The
Rest of Me Is Forced to Follow.
After the Writers’ Guild of America Strike
that Changed the World in 2008, I was
asked to host the first Saturday Night Live
back on the air. Finally, the world would
see
my
full
range
of
comedy



characters—from grouchy librarian to
Russian librarian.
Seth and Amy asked if I wanted to come
on Weekend Update to do a “Woman
News” segment.
The piece the Update writers and I threw
together was meant to be about the way
Hillary Clinton was being treated and
perceived during the campaign. It was
meant to point out that America seemed
more comfortable with a male minority
candidate than a white female candidate.
It was meant to discuss (in joke form) that
people didn’t take to Hillary because of
this vague feeling that she was kind of a
bitch and how unfair that was. It was
meant to be about gender politics, not actual politics.



What came out was an overt Hillary Clinton endorsement.
It wasn’t that I didn’t like Mrs. Clinton as
a candidate; it’s just that Weekend Update
features are written so hastily. If you’re
hosting, you don’t even start writing them
until Saturday afternoon. It’s no surprise
that they can come out sloppy and
strident. I was in the host’s dressing room
between dress rehearsal and air—feeling
like Stallone, but without the cigar or the
nice teeth. I just wanted the show to be
good. I needed a punchier ending to the
Hillary Clinton Update piece, and my
friend and makeup artist Richard Dean
suggested “Bitch is the new black.” It made
sense in the context of the piece and was
certainly punchy. Also, it was about 11:10
P.M., so yeah, let’s go with that.



I would have chosen to stop short of being
overtly political if I’d had more time to
smooth it out, because one: I think it’s
more powerful for comedians and news
anchors to be impartial, and two: I am a
coward.
The next day Obama supporters on the
Huffington Post were outraged. Former
president Clinton called me at home to
thank me. Mrs. Clinton called later that
same day to thank me, proving that Bill is
just a tiny bit better at the flash-charmhandshake part of politics.
When I told my mom that former president Clinton told me I “did a great thing for
my country” in defending Mrs. Clinton like
that, she made a barfing sound. Did I
mention
that
my
parents
are
Republicans?



Friday came, and I know what you’re wondering—yes, the Imaginext pirate ship and
sea monster I had ordered did arrive, and I
wrapped them in my dressing room
between setups. I shot for twelve hours at
the fake 30 Rock, then, after inspecting the
cleanliness of Oprah’s airplane set and
dressing room for the next morning,* I
headed over to the real 30 Rock at about
ten P.M. to rehearse with Amy Poehler. I
took comfort knowing that Amy could
carry the sketch if I stunk it up, because
she’s such a skilled and generous performer. I mean, she’s no Kattan in a dress,
but considering the Darwinian limitations
on women in comedy, she does very well
for herself.
We went out on the studio floor in front of
the crew, and I tentatively tried out my
half-baked impression. Not the worst. Significant room for improvement.



Because Seth and I had written for real impressionists like Darrell Hammond over
the years, we knew there were certain
tricks we could employ. Whatever sounds
are helpful to the impression, you use as
many of them as possible in the writing.
For Palin it was a lot of “hard R’s.” Words
like “reporters and commentators.” Words
you can’t say, you avoid. For example, I’ve
never been able to figure out how she says
“Todd.” Amy added jokes. I added some
jokes. The whole process was pleasant and
collaborative and easy.
Saturday, September 13, I got up at six
A.M. and filmed my scenes with Oprah at
Silvercup Studios in Queens. She was
great. She really does smell nice. And I got
to hug her a lot in the scenes. (If you’re not
into iTunes, you can buy 30 Rock on DVD
at your local Walmart.) Between setups I
sat with my daughter on my lap and



watched Governor Palin on YouTube and
tried to improve my accent. Oprah seemed
genuinely concerned for me. “How much
rehearsal time are you going to get?” “Do
you have tapes of her to listen to?” “You’re
going there right after this?!” (By the way,
when Oprah Winfrey is suggesting you may
have overextended yourself, you need to
examine your fucking life.) Around 5:30
P.M., Oprah and I wrapped and I went
over to SNL, but not before stealing an untouched Edible Arrangements® bouquet
from Oprah’s dressing room to serve at the
birthday party the next day.
The rest of the night went thusly: I got to
SNL, I tried on my wig and outfit, Amy and
I did the sketch three times—run-through,
dress rehearsal, and live—and that was it.
By 11:40 P.M., I had the rest of the show to
relax and have a glass of wine. It was



actually the first night out my husband and
I had in months.

The whole experience was surprisingly serene. Maybe it was because the Oprah footage was “in the can” and my heart could
stop eating itself. Maybe it was because I
was safe at the side of my sweet friend
Amy. Maybe it was because I knew I
couldn’t get fired because I didn’t even
work there anymore anyway. Obviously a
big part of it was that Seth had written a



very good sketch. I was not nervous at all,
and doing that sketch on live TV was a
pure joy I had never before experienced as
a performer.
Here is the sketch…

















This sketch easily could have been a dumb
catfight between two female candidates.
What Seth and Amy wrote, however, was
two women speaking out together against
sexism in the campaign. In real life these
women experienced different sides of the
same sexism coin. People who didn’t like
Hillary called her a ballbuster. People who
didn’t like Sarah called her Caribou Barbie.
People attempted to marginalize these women based on their gender. Amy’s line



“Although it is never sexist to question female politicians’ credentials” was basically
the thesis statement for everything we did
over the next six weeks. Not that anyone
noticed. You all watched a sketch about
feminism and you didn’t even realize it because of all the jokes. It’s like when Jessica
Seinfeld puts spinach in kids’ brownies.
Suckers!
That night’s show was watched by ten million people, so I guess that director at The
Second City who said the audience “didn’t
want to see a sketch with two women” can
go shit in his hat.
The next day’s birthday party was also successful and, I believe, had an equal impact
on the 2008 presidential campaign. Special thanks to my sister-in-law Dee, who
brought macaroni and cheese, and Jessie,
who made jerk chicken. Here is a now-



historic photo of my friend Michael’s pirate
ship cake.



The next few weeks were very exciting. On
Wednesday,
my
daughter
started
preschool. The Sunday after that, 30 Rock
won seven Emmys. Meanwhile, once a
week, I went to my goof-around night job
and did these sketches, and this is what I
remember about them.
Week 2: Katie Couric Interviews
Sarah Palin
I think Amy would want me to say she’s
very pregnant in this photo.
Seth had originally written a piece with
Sarah Palin “in one,” which means by herself, talking straight to the camera. I asked
if we could change it so I could be with
Amy again. Since my background



is improvisation and not stand-up, I really
prefer the buddy system on stage. The
Katie Couric interview was basically a
sketch handed to us on a plate.
Seth quickly wrote a draft, and because I
was watching Mrs. Palin over and over
again on YouTube to try to improve the impression, I asked Seth if I could put in this
long rambling run about the bailout that
was mostly just transcribed.
By the second week, I realized what made
this experience so fun and different. For
the first time ever, I was performing in



front of an audience that wanted to see
me. I had spent so many years handing out
fliers, begging people to check out my improv team. I was so used to trying to win
the audience over or just get permission to
be there that a willing audience was an incredible luxury. It was like having a weight
lifted off you. I thought, “This must be
what it’s like for Darrell when he plays Bill
Clinton.” Or for Tracy Morgan when he
does anything. People are just happy to see
them.
Week 3:
Debate

The

Vice

Presidential

This was my favorite sketch, and there are
three reasons why.
One, I felt like I contributed a lot of jokes
to this one, so my writer ego likes it the
best.



Two, Queen Latifah was there.
Three, I thought the speeches that Jim
Downey wrote for Jason Sudeikis as Joe
Biden were brilliant. Especially the stuff
where Biden is trying to prove that he’s not
some Washington elite by talking about
how he’s from Scranton, Pennsylvania,
“the most godforsaken place on earth.” I
thought that was ingenious, because not
only was the ad hominem attack on Scranton a hilarious comedy left turn, it also exemplified what the election had become.
Instead of talking about issues, everybody
was trying to prove how “down-home” they
were. “I’m just like you” was the subtext of
every speech.
Politics and prostitution have to be the
only jobs where inexperience is considered
a virtue. In what other profession would
you brag about not knowing stuff? “I’m not



one of those fancy Harvard heart surgeons.
I’m just an unlicensed plumber with a
dream and I’d like to cut your chest open.”
The crowd cheers.
Two jokes I remember writing for the debate sketch are this one about global
warming: Gwen Ifill
Senator Palin, address your position on
global warming and whether you think it’s
man-made or not.
Gov. Sarah Palin
Gwen, we don’t know if this climate change
hoozie-what’s-it is man-made or if it’s just
a natural part of the “End of Days.”
And this one:
Gwen Ifill



Governor Palin, would you extend samesex rights to the entire country?
Gov. Sarah Palin
You know, I would be afraid of where that
would lead. I believe marriage is meant to
be a sacred institution between two unwilling teenagers.
This joke about the “sacred institution of
marriage” was probably the roughest joke
we did.
“Rough” in sketch comedy language means
harsh or dark. As I’m sure you remember,
Mrs. Palin’s daughter Bristol was pregnant
at the time and engaged to her high school
boyfriend Levi Johnston. This joke was
right on the edge of being too directly
about the Palin family. I felt, however, that
because
Bristol’s
pregnancy
and



subsequent engagement had been embraced by so many people as a shining example of the pro-life movement, it was officially part of the campaign. Also, the joke
wasn’t that rough. An example of a truly
rough joke would be this:
A pedophile walks through the woods with
a child. The child says, “These woods are
scary.” The pedophile says, “Tell me about
it. I have to walk back through here
alone.”
That is a rough joke.
Or:
Sarah Palin: To think that just two years
ago, I was a small-town mayor of Alaska’s
crystal meth capital. And now I am just
one weird mole away from being president of the United States.



A John McCain skin cancer joke? Too
rough. That was a joke I tried in dress rehearsal in the Sarah-Hillary sketch. My
friend Jen Rogers, who is a cancer survivor, thought it was funny. The studio audience did not.
I remember very distinctly walking off
stage after Latifah yelled “Live from New
York,” thinking that this was the most fun,
exciting thing I would ever do. I remember
thinking this was a “permanent win.” No
one would ever be able to take it away from
me. The proof existed permanently on tape
that on this one occasion, I was funny.
Here at the midway point of my six-week
career, the sketches were really becoming
“a thing.”
They were being watched around the world
on the Internet. A French newspaper



accidentally ran a picture of Amy and me
from the Katie Couric sketch thinking it
was a picture of Couric and Palin.
Although I think that had less to do with
the “power of satire” and more to do with
the fact that to the French, we are all indistinguishable fat dough balls.
And Oh, the Cable News Reportage! The
great thing about cable news is that they
have to have something to talk about
twenty-four hours a day. Sometimes it’s
Anderson Cooper giggling with one of the
Real Housewives of Atlanta. Sometimes it’s
Rick Sanchez screaming about corn syrup.
They have endless time to fill, but viewers
get kind of “bummed out” if they supply
actual information about wars and stuff, so
“Media Portrayal of Sarah Palin” and SNL
and I became the carrageenan in America’s
news nuggets for several weeks. I was a



cable news star, like a shark or a missing
white child!
The downside of being a cable news star is
that any asshair with a clip-on tie can come
on as an
“expert” to talk about you. One day, by accident, I caught this tool Tom something
on MSNBC saying that he thought I had
not “conducted myself well” during all this.
In his opinion, Mrs. Palin had conducted
herself with dignity and I had not. (I’m
pretty sure Tom’s only claim to expertise is
that he oversees a website where people
guess incorrectly who might win show biz
awards.) There was a patronizing attitude
behind Tom’s comments that I certainly
don’t think he would have applied to a
male comedian. Chris Rock was touring at
the time and he was literally calling George
W. Bush



“retarded” in his act. I don’t think Tom
something would have expressed disappointment that Chris was not conducting
himself sweetly. I learned how incredibly
frustrating it is to watch someone talk
smack about you and not be able to
respond.
This kind of anger, I suspect, is the main
thing Mrs. Palin and I have in common.
When someone says something bad about
us, we want to respond.
However, I, as an experienced member of
the East Coast Media Elite, know that you
can’t even try. You can rage to your spouse
all you want, but the moment you post Internet comments under an assumed name,
or call in spontaneously to a radio show to
assert that you are not “a butterface,” or
write that letter to Lisa de Moraes of the



Washington Post instructing her to “go
suck a bag of dicks,”
you have crossed the
Crazytown, never to return.

border

into

Around This Time…
Around this time my old friend Damian
Holbrook, a writer for TV Guide, had arranged to interview me for the new fall season. (Damian and I did Summer Showtime
together.* I named the character Damian
in Mean Girls after him.)
He spent the day on the 30 Rock set and
came over to my apartment for dinner
afterward.
Damian has a great sense of humor and we
laughed a lot. After dinner—long after what
I considered the



“interview portion” of our day to be
over—Damian asked me what I would do if
McCain-Palin won the election. Would I
continue to moonlight at SNL? I said in a
jokey, actress-y voice, “If they win, I will
leave Earth.” It was clearly a joke about
people who say stupid things like that. No
matter what your political beliefs, everyone
knows some loudmouth: “If Bush wins, I’m
moving to Canada.” “If Bush wins again, I
am seriously moving to Canada.” “If
Obama wins, I’m going to shoot that
*#%*@.” Etc.
But Damian put “I’m leaving Earth” in his
article, and in print it looked sincerely idiotic. His editor leaked it in advance of the
issue to generate attention for the
magazine. Cable news took the bait and
ran with it. I looked like a grade A dummy.
I was annoyed at Damian, but mostly I just
found it disconcerting. That I could get in



“trouble” for a half-baked joke I made in
my own home was a level of scrutiny I did
not enjoy.
My brother called me, genuinely concerned. I should watch what I was saying
because there are
“a lot of nuts out there.” I hung up the
phone and burst into tears in the 30 Rock
writers’ room. Poor Matt Hubbard watched
my meltdown with a look of concern and
disgust usually reserved for watching your
mom vomit.
Week 4: Weekend Update PrimeTime Special with Will Ferrell
SNL was doing half-hour specials on
Thursday nights at 8:30. I was able to be in
one, in what can only be described as “My
Trip to Sketch Comedy Fantasy Camp.” I



got to stand next to Will Ferrell as George
W. Bush and Darrell Hammond as John
McCain. These two dudes are the masters.
Darrell is a precise technician who can do
anyone from Jesse Jackson to Donald
Trump to Al Gore. Will, on the other hand,
is an impressionist in the style of the Impressionists. His technique is loose, bordering on random, but when you step back
he has rendered George W. Bush.

If Darrell is da Vinci, Will is Monet, and I
am me, in a wig.



This sketch had a different tone than the
other sketches because it was written by
the world’s number one comic genius,
Adam McKay ( Anchorman, Talladega
Nights). It was about George W. Bush trying to endorse the McCain-Palin ticket and
John McCain trying to avoid the
endorsement.
It’s worth pointing out that this sketch was
the tipping point for my Republican parents. They had been as excited and entertained as anyone for the first few weeks.
Maybe the tone of this sketch was more aggressive, or maybe the cable news cycle
had worn them down into thinking we
were being mean, but the end result was a
scolding from my mom: “It’s getting to be
too much now.”
Week 5: The “Sneaker Upper”



“Sneaker Upper” is a term that veteran
SNL writer Jim Downey coined to describe
that queer moment when a famous person
“sneaks up” behind the actor who plays
them and pretends to be mad about it. I
would expand Jim’s definition to include
any time someone being parodied volunteers to come on the show and prove
they’re “in on the joke.” Comedy writers
hate Sneaker Uppers. On a pure writing
level, it’s just lame. But like other lame
things—sorbet, line dancing, New Year’s
Eve—people seem to love it. I’m not saying
I’m above a Sneaker Upper. During my
time at SNL I was involved in at least five
of these things. They varied in success and
included people ranging from Debbie
Matenopoulos to Monica Lewinsky.
If you were having a Sneaker Upper week,
your coworkers would ask sympathetically,
“How’s that going?” What could you do?



Some weeks you got to produce a pure
little comedy piece that was dear to your
heart and had a great host like Alec Baldwin or Julia Louis-Dreyfus in it. Some
weeks you had to sit and take notes from
the smallest Hanson brother about what
jokes he didn’t care for. The Sneaker Upper
is just an occupational hazard, and as occupational hazards go, it’s much better than
getting your arm caught in the thresher.
What I’m getting to is, during week five,
Sarah Palin’s campaign people called
Lorne to say she’d like to be on the show. I
was against it.
One, it was a classic Sneaker Upper, and
we had been so successful on a writing
level up to that point.
Two, things were getting tense. McCainPalin supporters were yelling racist



invective at rallies, and the campaign
wasn’t exactly shutting that behavior
down. I didn’t want to joke around and hug
her on camera and be perceived as endorsing their campaign.
Three, I had seen footage of Governor Palin and her sweet littlest daughter, Piper,
getting booed at a Flyers game. (Classy, hometown, real classy.) I was sure that the
liberal NYC studio audience for SNL
would boo the shit out of her. I didn’t want
that to happen and I definitely didn’t want
to stand next to her while that happened
and have it seem like we had laid a trap for
her. I didn’t want to be complicit in an ugly
live-TV moment during what was becoming an increasingly ugly campaign.



Lorne didn’t think it would be a problem.
However, Lorne was also riding three
weeks of 7+
ratings, and the real Mrs. Palin would
surely exceed that. She was ratings
gold—pure nuggets of “ratings gold” just
waiting to be extracted from the teeth of a
corpse. (In this metaphor I’m not sure if
the corpse represents my career, the
McCain campaign, or broadcast television.)
I told Lorne that if the real governor did
the show, I would sit this one out. Lorne
suggested I not decide so quickly. He and I
both knew that things had gotten so weird
in the cable news cycle that if I didn’t show
up, it would be just as much of a fake news
story. The CNN crawl would have read,
“MEAN
GIRL: Fey refuses to appear with Palin.
Palin supporters call the move ‘un-



American’ and ‘vaguely Jewish.’ Tonight at
9 EST Rick Sanchez uncovers the Corn Syrup Myth…”
It really was a catch-22 for me, unless
Lorne would just decline to have her on.
And that wasn’t going to happen. See
above re: ratings gold.
I was hurt that Lorne would put me in this
position. At the same time, it is never lost
on me that he also “put me in the position”
of being on TV in the first place, which no
one else in the world would have done.
Trust me, I used to audition for things.
I called Lorne and said I would do the
show but that it was very important to me
that we protect Governor Palin from being
booed. I suggested that he start with her
backstage in the 8H hallway. The live audience would only see her on the monitors



and, not knowing if what they were seeing
was live or pretaped, they would be less
likely to boo.
My only other request was this: I never
wanted to appear in a “two shot” with Mrs.
Palin. I mean, she really is taller and better
looking than I am, and we would literally
be wearing the same outfit.
I’d already been made to stand next to Jennifer Aniston and Salma Hayek on camera
in my life; a gal can



only take so much. And honestly, I knew
that if that picture existed, it would be
what they show on the Emmys someday
when I die, and I’d really rather they show
this picture.
Lorne called back the next day to say he
had an idea and Seth was working on a
draft. We’d start with me in a fake press
conference, then cut to Lorne and
Governor Palin backstage. It was Lorne’s
idea to have Alec Baldwin there, too.
As a beloved SNL host and a known liberal
crusader, Alec standing next to Sarah
would send out an “everybody be cool”
message to the audience.
We rehearsed on Saturday afternoon as
usual, but this time there was massive security in the building for the vice presidential nominee. I met Mrs. Palin on the



studio floor when we came out to rehearse.
She was in full hair and makeup because
she’d come straight from a campaign stop.
I had my hair in a ponytail and looked my
trademark exhausted. We shook hands and
I blurted out, “Don’t worry, they’ll put
makeup on me.” As we took our places to
rehearse, my daughter pointed animatedly
at Governor Palin on the monitor. “She’s
confused,” Mrs. Palin laughed.
We didn’t hang out much, but we chatted a
little about children. She offered her
daughter Bristol to babysit Alice during the
show if need be. I thanked her, saying Alice
was too little to stay for the show. She always went home with her dad after the
dinner break. I can’t imagine Bristol would
have been too psyched to do that anyway;
it was her eighteenth birthday, she was in
New York City, and I had made a vicious
joke about her a week earlier. But I



appreciated the mom-ness of Mrs. Palin’s
offer. She might as well have said, “You
guys need to take these sets down tonight?
Cuz I can get Todd down here with a
Makita.”
Mrs. Palin’s whole camp was helpful. Her
hairstylist made adjustments to my wig to
make it even more like the governor’s hair.
Her makeup artist identified the lip color
that we’d been trying to figure out for four
weeks: It was just lip liner, under
Chapstick.
And then it was 11:30.
Seth wrote an admirable Sneaker Upper.
Some solid jokes at the top, and Alec was
funny with her backstage. There was the
requisite amount of sweaty feigned
surprise.



Governor Palin and I crossed paths for just
an instant, and when she took center stage
she was greeted with a long round of applause. I’d like to think that my suggestion
of starting her backstage paid off, but more
likely I had underestimated what a giant
media star Sarah Palin was; even the New
Yorkiest audience was giddy to see her in
person.
After the show I felt compelled to find Mrs.
Palin in her dressing room and say goodbye. “Good job. You should come back and
host sometime,” I said. She certainly could
handle it. And then, “Now, you’re gonna
tell everyone you had a good time in New
York City, right? And that everyone was
really nice to you?” Mrs. Palin smiled and
nodded. “Yep. Nobody was scary or anything.” I couldn’t believe the condescension that was coming out of my mouth. I
was talking to this woman like I was



reminding a child to say “please.” I guess I
was just hoping that wherever the campaign took her the next day, she would include New York City as one of the “proAmerica” parts of her country.
In my opinion, the most meaningful moment for women in the 2008 campaign
was not Governor Palin’s convention
speech or Hillary Clinton conceding her
1,896 delegates. The moment most emblematic of how things have changed for
women in America was nine-months-pregnant Amy Poehler rapping as Sarah Palin
and tearing the roof off the place.
Watching Amy rap made me so happy that
she had found a way to make real comedy
out of a Sneaker Upper. The virtuosity and
joyfulness of her performance made me
feel like it was time for me to hand this job
back to the professionals. I felt like that



character in Flowers for Algernon. Not
Charlie, the lady teacher from the college
who realizes, “I’ve got to stop dry-humping
this mentally challenged guy!”
The rating was a 10.7/14 million people.
One More Weird Time, and That’s
It?
The week before the election, John McCain
wanted to come on the show. I had met
Senator McCain when he hosted SNL in
2002, and we all liked him very much. (He
was not one of the unnamed d-bags.) I had
even spent a day with him in DC. He gave
my husband and me a tour of the Senate
before we posed together for this “get out
the vote” cover of Life magazine.



(The magazine went under immediately
after this, by the way.) Did it seem insane
that a presidential candidate would want to
appear in a sketch parodying his running
mate just days before the election? Sure,
but what didn’t seem insane then? A
Kenyan Communist Muslim was about to
be elected president. Seth wrote a sketch
about McCain-Palin buying time on QVC
as a last-ditch effort to reach voters.



For the last time* Jane the makeup artist
overdrew my lips to make my mouth look
wider. Louis glued my ears down (my ears
stick out and Sarah’s don’t) and Betty
popped on my long brown wig. I went to
Senator McCain’s dressing room to read
through the cue cards with him, and he
started laughing uncomfortably when he
saw me. “It’s just weird,” he said.
And that was it. We had gone through the
entire life cycle of an SNL character—from
first-time jitters to Sneaker Upper to “This
again?”—in six weeks.
One of the best parts of all this is that my
daughter may actually have childhood
memories of going to SNL. I left so soon
after she was born, I didn’t think she would
know that place or those people, but now
she will, which means a lot to me because
that was my home for a long time.



One of the worst parts of all of this was
that I learned what it felt like to be a lightning rod. I got some hate mail, and there
are definitely people out there who will dislike me for the rest of my life because of
“what I did” to Sarah Palin. On an intellectual level, this doesn’t bother me at all. On
a human level, I would prefer to be liked.
There was an assumption that I was personally attacking Sarah Palin by impersonating her on TV. No one ever said it was
“mean” when Chevy Chase played Gerald
Ford falling down all the time. No one ever
accused Dana Carvey or Darrell Hammond
or Dan Aykroyd of “going too far” in their
political impressions. You see what I’m
getting at here. I am not mean and Mrs.
Palin is not fragile. To imply otherwise is a
disservice to us both.
A few months after our friendly chat about
kids (and my condescending remarks



about New York), Mrs. Palin told conservative filmmaker John Ziegler that Katie
Couric and I had exploited and profited by
her family. But I know better than to respond to attacks in the media. Although if I
were to respond, I would probably just say,
“Nice reality show.” Or maybe I’d point out
that when those sketches were watched 58
million times on the Internet around the
world, I was paid nothing because actors
don’t get any money for Internet reuse.
(Get ready for an actors’ strike in 2012.)
But I’d probably just know better than to
respond.
Some may argue that exploiting Governor
Palin and her family helped bring attention
to my low-rated TV show. I am proud to
say you are wrong. My TV show still enjoys
very low ratings. In fact, I think the Palin
stuff may have hurt the TV show. Let’s face
it, between Alec Baldwin and me there is a



certain fifty percent of the population who
think we are pinko Commie monsters.
There’s a Drunk Midget in My House
Ah, babies! They’re more than just adorable little creatures on whom you can
blame your farts.
Like most people who have had one baby, I
am an expert on everything and will tell
you, unsolicited, how to raise your kid!
Breast-feeding v. Formula
Invented in the mid-1800s as a last-ditch
option for orphans and underweight babies, packaged infant formula has since
been perfected to be a complete and reliable source of stress and shame for mothers. Anyone who reads a pregnancy book
knows that breast milk provides nutrition,
immunities, and invaluable bonding time.



The breast is best. Unless you need to get
back on your psych meds or something, in
which case give your baby Crystal Light on
the Go or whatever it takes for you to not
go crazy.
But if you’re healthy, you really should
nurse. You owe it to your baby to breastfeed.
When I was pregnant (remember, I was
pregnant once, and I’m on TV: Those two
things combined make me an expert) I was
confused as to why all the literature about
breast-feeding was surrounded by ads for
formula.
The free magazines in my doctor’s office all
said the same thing in their articles:
“Breast-feeding is best for your baby.” But
overwhelming those articles were pages of



heartwarming full-color ads saying things
like:
“Your baby deserves the best. INFAMILK,
now with more Crypthecodinium!”
“DOCTORS SAY breastfeed or if you’re an
adoptive mother TRY SIMIMIL.”
“10 out of 100,000 doctors say Enfante
probably doesn’t cause blindness.”
“No other formula gives your baby a better
start in life except that stuff that comes out
of you for free.”
Should I breast-feed or not? I asked my
mother for advice. “Don’t even try it,” she
said. This is a generational difference. This
is the same woman who told me to request
“twilight sleep” during delivery. (Twilight
sleep is the memory-erasing pain medication that doctors gave women in the 1950s



whenever they had to take a baby out or
put a body snatcher in.) I could never have
chosen twilight sleep because I wanted to
be present for my birth experience and also
it is no longer offered. My mom is a Depression baby. As a member of Generation
X, I was more informed, more empowered,
and I knew that when it came to breastfeeding I had an obligation to my baby to
pretend to try.
I chose to breast-feed, and it was an amazing time in my life. It really changed me as
a woman, and it’s the most gratifying thing
I’ve ever done.*
There are a lot of different opinions as to
how long one should breast-feed. The
World Health Organization says six
months. The American Association of Pediatrics says one year is ideal. Mothering
magazine suggests you nurse the child



until just before his rehearsal dinner. I say
you must find what works for you. For my
little angel and me the magic number was
about seventy-two hours.
We began our breast-feeding journey in
the hospital under the tutelage of an encouraging Irish night nurse named Mary.
We tried the football hold, the cross-cradle
hold, and one I like to call the Bret Michaels, where you kind of lie over the baby
and stick your breast in its mouth to wake
it up. We didn’t succeed, so that first night
the other nurses gave my little one some
formula without asking. I tried to be appalled, but I was pretty tired. Once we got
home, we tried again. I abandoned all vanity, as one must, and parked it shirtless on
the couch. Here we experienced another
generational difference. Gen X



wanted to succeed at this so she could tell
people she did it, and little Gen Z wanted
me to hand over that goddamn formula,
and she was willing to scream until she got
it.
One of my five hundred nicknames for my
daughter is Midge, which is short for Midget, because she was a very small baby. She
was born a week early and a little underweight at five pounds seven ounces. My obstetrician suggested the next day at her
bedside visit that perhaps I hadn’t rested
enough during my pregnancy and that was
why she was so small. “What a cunt,” I
thought to myself in what was either a
flash of postpartum hormones or an accurate assessment of my doctor’s personality.
So we started supplementing Midge regularly with formula. She was small and I
didn’t want her to get any smaller while I



mastered the ancient art of breast-feeding
to prove how incredible and impressive I
am. Of course, I still provided her breast
milk. You must, must, must provide them
with breast milk. You owe it to your baby
to get them that breast milk. Here’s how it
works.
If you choose to not love your baby enough
to breast-feed, you can pump your milk using a breast pump. (This may be easier for
the modern mom because it is an expensive appliance and we’re more comfortable
with those than with babies.) Set up a
pumping ritual for yourself that is relaxing
and consistent. I chose to pump every two
hours while watching episodes of the HBO
series Entourage On Demand. Over the
whir of the milking machine, I could almost hear my baby being lovingly cared for
in the other room while Turtle yelled
across an SUV, “Yo E, you ever fuck a girl



while she has her period?” I was able to do
this for almost seven weeks before running
out of Entourage episodes and sinking into
a deep depression.
Shortly thereafter, we made the switch to
an all-formula diet. If you’ve ever opened a
can of infant formula mix, then you know it
smells like someone soaked old vitamins in
a bucket of wet leaves, then dried them in a
hot car. Also, formula is like forty dollars a
can. They keep it locked up behind the
counter with the batteries and meth ingredients. That’s how bad people want this
stuff!
However, the baby was thriving. I was no
longer feeling trapped, spending thirty out
of every ninety minutes attached to a
Williams-Sonoma Tit Juicer. But I still had
an
overwhelming
feeling
of



disappointment. I had failed at something
that was supposed to be natural.
I was defensive and grouchy whenever the
topic came up. At a party with a friend who
was successfully nursing her little boy, I
watched her husband produce a bottle of
pumped breast milk that was the size of a
Big Gulp. It was more milk than I had produced in my whole seven weeks—I blame
Entourage. As my friend’s husband fed the
baby, he said offhandedly, “This stuff is liquid gold. You know it actually makes
them smarter?” “Let’s set a date!” I
screamed. “IQ test. Five years from today.
My formula baby will crush your baby!”
Thankfully, my mouth was so full of cake
they could not understand me.
Once I let go of my guilt, which took a
while, the only remaining obstacle was the
Teat Nazis.



These are the women who not only brag
endlessly about how much their five year
old still loves breast milk, but they also
grill you about your choices. You can recognize the TNs by their hand-carved
daggers:
“Are you breast-feeding? Isn’t it amazing? I
really think it’s how I lost the weight so
easily. Did you have a vaginal birth? I went
natural and I didn’t even tear. Are you back
at work already? Do you feel weird about
going back to work? I just love my baby so
much I can’t imagine going back to work
yet.
You’re not nursing? She’s only fifteen
months; you should try again!”
Now, let me be clear; millions of women
around the world nurse their children
beautifully for years without giving



anybody else a hard time about it. Teat
Nazis are a solely western upper-middleclass phenomenon occurring when highly
ambitious women experience deprivation
from outside modes of achievement. Their
highest infestation pockets are in Brooklyn
and Hollywood.
If you are confronted by a TN, you have
two options. One, when they ask if you’re
breast-feeding, you can smile and say,
“Yes. It’s amazing.” (You owe it to your
baby to lie.) Or you can go for the kill. The
only people who can shame the Teat Nazis
are the Adoptive Mommies. If you have a
friend who has an adopted child, especially
one from another country, bring him or
her around, because they make the Teat
Nazis’ brains short-circuit: “How can I…
feel superior… you… bigger sacrifice… can’t
judge…” and their big ol’ dinner plate



nipples pop off as they crumple to the
ground and disappear.
Lesson learned? When people say, “You
really, really must ” do something, it means
you don’t really have to. No one ever says,
“You really, really must deliver the baby
during labor.” When it’s true, it doesn’t
need to be said.
“Me Time”
Any expert will tell you, the best thing a
mom can do to be a better mom is to carve
out a little time for herself. Here are some
great “me time” activities you can do.
Go to the bathroom a lot.
Offer to empty the dishwasher.



Take ninety-minute showers. (If you only
shower every three or four days, it will be
easier to get away with this.)
Say you’re going to look for the diaper
crème, then go into your child’s room and
just stand there until your spouse comes in
and curtly says, “What are you doing?”
Stand over the sink and eat the rest of
your child’s dinner while he or she pulls at
your pant leg asking for it back.
Try to establish that you’re the only one in
your family allowed to go to the post
office.
“Sleep when your baby sleeps.” Everyone
knows this classic tip, but I say why stop
there? Scream when your baby screams.
Take Benadryl when your baby takes



Benadryl. And walk around pantless
when your baby walks around pantless.
Read! When your baby is finally down for
the night, pick up a juicy book like Eat,
Pray, Love or Pride and Prejudice or my
personal favorite, Understanding Sleep
Disorders: Narcolepsy and Apnea; A Clinical Study. Taking some time to read each
night really taught me how to feign narcolepsy when my husband asked me what
my “plan” was for taking down the Christmas tree.
Just implementing four or five of these
little techniques will prove restorative and
give you the energy you need to not drink
until nighttime.
A Celebrity’s Guide to Celebrating
the Birth of Jesus



Goldie and Kurt like to soak in the crystal
blue waters of St. Barts. Melanie and Antonio prefer the festive chill of Aspen. Tina
and Jeff are absolutely mad for Route 80W
between Philadelphia and Youngstown!
We never miss it.
Lying on a beach feels a little “first
thought” to me. I prefer the retro chic of
spending Christmas just like Joseph and
Mary did—traveling arduously back to the
place of your birth to be counted, with no
guarantee of a bed when you get there. You
may end up sleeping on an old wicker
couch with a dog licking your face while an
Ab Rocket infomercial plays in the background. It’s a modern-day manger.
Our annual pilgrimage from one set of inlaws to the other happens every December
26, or, as they call it in Canada: Boring
Day.



We always plan to leave around seven in
the morning and, like clockwork, we’re out
the door by ten. After gassing up, deicing,
and turning around for an unanticipated
bowel movement, we glide onto glorious
80W by ten thirty. Sure, there are those
trendy types who prefer 76/70 because it’s
“more scenic” and “they have a McDonald’s,” but I think 80W has a certain ceci
me déprime.
My husband drives the whole seven hours
because I don’t have a driver’s license. It’s
just one of the many ways in which I am
developmentally stunted. I don’t drive. I
can’t cook meat correctly. And I have no affinity for animals. I don’t hate animals and
I would never hurt an animal; I just don’t
actively care about them. When a coworker
shows me cute pictures of her dog, I
struggle to respond correctly, like an autistic person who has been taught to



recognize human emotions from flash
cards. In short, I am the worst.
There are plenty of positives to being married to me. I just can’t think of any of them
right now, and I’m sure my husband can’t
think of any of them either while he’s driving wideways across Pennsylvania.
Still: There’s something hypnotic and relaxing about cruising through the Alleghenies, frantically searching for a radio signal. If traffic is moving well, you won’t ever
find a station that lasts for an entire song.
So you nestle in between your baking-hot
dashboard and the freezing-cold door and
enjoy the radio’s static with occasional
fragments of a shouted religious broadcast.
KHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH—Friends, are
you living in such a way that there is a
crown
in
heaven
waiting
for



you?—KHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
man
must
die
of
self—KHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
When you feel about to “die of self,” pull
over and enjoy one of the local eateries.
I recommend the Roy Rogers at Exit 4B or
the Roy Rogers at Exit 78. If you’re a diehard
“foodie,” hop off the road in DuBois and
enjoy a Subway sandwich made at a place
that is eighty percent gas station.
“Youngstown!” my husband always yells as
we pass the sign. He yells it in a way that
you can actually hear the letters getting
bigger at the end like an old-timey postcard. It never fails to startle me and make
me laugh. Half the time it wakes me up.



Yes, I fall asleep while he’s driving. Did I
mention that I’m the worst?
In the last hour, highway turns to snowy
country roads and the GPS system shuts
down because you’re in a part of the world
that Toyota doesn’t recognize (and the feeling is mutual).
We always pull up carefully, making sure
not to run over any outdoor cats. (One of
the best-kept secrets of “country life” is
that people accidentally crush their own
pets a lot.) The house is cozy warm from
the wood-burning heater. There are hugs
and kisses and pies and soup and ham and
biscuits and a continuous flow of Maxwell
House coffee with nondairy creamer. We
City Folk can pretend that we prefer the
rotgut from Starcorps with skim milk and
Splenda, but who are we kidding? Maxwell



House with French vanilla corn syrup cannot be beat.
If there’s one thing my husband’s hometown has that St. Barts does not, it’s the water. “Legally potable” doesn’t quite capture
it. Straight from the tap it smells like…
How can I describe it?—if you boiled ten
thousand eggs in a prostitute’s bathwater.
It turns your jewelry green, but it leaves
your hair soft and manageable. So, while I
couldn’t find it in St. Barts, I could probably sell it there.
My in-laws always have a huge dog—a dog
so big that even I can see it. For years it
was Robbie.
When Robbie passed away from
surprisingly non-vehicle-related causes,
they got Bear. Another way my body rejects
dog love is that I am allergic to them.



Those first few Christmases, I had to dose
myself with Benadryl to survive. I would
end up sleeping half the day and then
shuffling aimlessly around the house like
later-years Judy Garland in a Christmas
special. Most of my in-laws didn’t experience my actual personality until Claritin
was invented. By then it was too late to get
rid of me.
My three sisters-in-law have always been
welcoming and affectionate, and boy, can
they clean a kitchen. After a big family
meal they rinse and scrape and dry and
Saran-wrap like nobody’s business. I pitch
in half-assedly like the spoiled suburban
younger child that I am. “Where… should I
put… this…
chicken bone? Throw it out, or…?” See
above, re: “worst.”



I can’t promise you will find a family as
lovely as my in-laws to stay with on your
Route 80
Christmas. Honestly, I know you won’t, because we had Mamaw Pearline. Pearline
was eighty-seven when I met her and she
lived to be ninety-six. She spent almost all
her time upstairs in the den watching TV
and chain-smoking. She had gradually retired from working hard all her life, raising
kids, cleaning, and cooking in a coal camp
in West Virginia. She had earned the right
to refer to the National Enquirer as
“the newspaper.”
By the time my daughter was born,
Pearline’s short-term memory was gone.
She’d come downstairs and smile at the
baby. “Whose little baby is this?” “IT’S
JEFF’S!” we’d yell. “Look at those dark



eyebrows.” She’d smile and pat the baby’s
head. “I never saw a baby with such dark
eyebrows!”
Then, two hours later, she’d come down for
a cup of coffee. “Whose little baby is this?
Look at those dark eyebrows!” This went
on for three days.
For reference, this is the swarthy little baby
she was talking about.



We did seven or eight 80W Christmases in
a row before I had to be a fool and mess
with perfection. Why couldn’t I be like Goldie and Kurt and stick with what works? I
couldn’t because as glamorous as the drive
always was, it got even more magical and
glamorous when the baby became a toddler. One year, I believe, she screamed all
the way from Hazleton to the Moshannon
State Forest.
And who could blame her? She didn’t understand why we had strapped her into this
frozen contraption only to shove cold Roy
Rogers fries in her mouth.
In an attempt to make things easier for
myself, which is the basis for all of history’s
worst decisions (see: “George W. Bush’s
Repeal of the Estate Tax,” “Scott Peterson’s
Plan,” and “Dred Scott v.



Sandford” ), I invited the whole family out
to New York for a Christmas adventure. I
learned quickly that trying to force Country
Folk to love the Big City is like telling your
gay cousin, “You just haven’t met the right
girl yet.” They just don’t like big cities. It’s
okay. It’s natural. They were born that way.
When you see your Big City through a nonadmirer’s eyes you notice things you normally would not.
“Hmm. I guess there are a lot of dog turds
on Eighty-third Street.”
“No, it’s great. We just put our garbage out
the back door and when it starts to overflow the super picks it up.”
“Who, that guy? Yeah… he’s playing with
himself. Okay, let’s go in the playground
the other way.”



The Christmas in New York Adventure
didn’t go so well. My father-in-law tripped
on a crack in the pavement and spent the
rest of the week politely pretending he had
not dislocated his shoulder. I dragged all
the kids onto the subway and through the
crowd to see the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree, which is unlike any tree in the
world, except for hundreds of trees near
their homes in Ohio.
If I had one bone to pick with the Country
Folks, it’s that they are not gastronomically
adventurous. Family-style Italian sent
them all running for the Alka-Seltzer.
Greek yogurt left my sister-in-law stymied,
like I had offered her a bowl of caulk. But
who am I to judge? I have never been able
to get my head around ham salad or
pickled eggs. And I would like it explained
to me in writing what’s so great about
apple butter.



After four days, I could see the city wearing
them down. It was too much walking for
them, oddly. It turns out City Folk walk
way more than Country Folk.
My young nephew went to the deli with
me. “There sure are a lot of foreigners
here.” No, I explained, those people live
here. In the “Great American Melting Pot,”
rural Ohio may be a lump of white flour
that hasn’t been stirred properly. Not that
New York is any better. New York is that
chunk of garlic that you bite into thinking
it’s potato and you can’t get the taste out of
your mouth all day. It all blends once you
mix it, but sometimes you really have to
grind it against the side.
Clearly we needed to shake that year off
and try something new. Last year, determined to



“save” the full 80W drive until our daughter can really appreciate it in twenty years
or so, I made a new pitch: Let’s meet in the
middle.
We
chose
Williamsport,
Pennsylvania, home of the Little League
World Series and almost exactly halfway
between us on the map.
We’d spend three days and two nights at
the Holiday Inn and then head our separate ways. I cannot emphasize to you how
well this went… because I don’t know how
to do “double underline” on my computer.
The kids swam in the hotel pool. We dined
at Red Lobster. There is no one of-womanborn who does not like Red Lobster cheddar biscuits. Anyone who claims otherwise
is a liar and a Socialist. We fed fifteen
people for two hundred dollars. Success!



The next day, while Beyoncé and Jay-Z
were probably having a frustrating time on
their yacht trying to figure out the French
word for plunger, we walked around the
Lycoming Mall. There was a carousel for
the kids. Later, we exchanged gifts in the
lobby by a ten-foot Christmas tree that
none of us had to put up or take down.
Victory!
That night, while Mariah and Nick
shopped for dog jewelry in Aspen, we convened for an amazing meal at a local inn
called the Herdic House. This stately
Victorian inn offered a menu where city
jerks and country carnivores could find
common ground. Pork chops, duck, pear
crisp. The setting was cozy and twinkly and
Christmassy in a way that worked for
everybody.



Of course the final ingredient for a perfect
Christmas vacation is a good Buffer. A
Buffer is a neutral party who keeps the
conversation light. Everyone needs a
Buffer. You don’t think Mary and Joseph
were psyched to see the Little Drummer
Boy?
That night at the Herdic House my best
friend from high school, Marlene, and her
husband joined us for the evening. She was
visiting family in Williamsport, too, and
she is the perfect Buffer. My girl Marlene
can talk to anyone. She could talk to a
Frankenstein about neck bolts. She could
talk to your great-aunt Joyce about the tumors of a person she has never met. She
could exchange e-mail addresses with a
wreath. Nick and Mariah wish they had a
Buffer this good. They probably wanted to
kill each other after three days of wearing



matching ski outfits and never skiing.
WILLIAMSPORT FOR THE WIN!
This Christmas I’ll be riding my metaphorical donkey all the way across 80W again.
But I’m insisting that we’re back in New
York City for New Year’s Eve, where we do
more of an Ahab-and-Jezebel thing.
Juggle This
My daughter recently checked out a book
from the preschool library called My
Working Mom. It had a cartoon witch on
the cover. “Did you pick this book out all
by yourself?” I asked her, trying to be nonchalant. Yes. We read the book and the
witch mother was very busy and sometimes reprimanded her daughter for messing things up near her cauldron. She had to
fly away to a lot of meetings, and the
witch’s child said something like, “It’s hard



having a working mom, especially when
she enjoys her work.” In the heartwarming
conclusion, the witch mother makes it to
the child’s school play at the last second,
and the witch’s child says she doesn’t like
having a working mom but she can’t picture her mom any other way. I didn’t love
it. I’m sure the TWO MEN who wrote this
book had the absolute best intentions, but
this leads me to my point. The topic of
working moms is a tap-dance recital in a
minefield.
It is less dangerous to draw a cartoon of
Allah French-kissing Uncle Sam—which let
me make it very clear I HAVE NOT
DONE—than it is to speak honestly about
this topic.
I will start by saying that I have once or
twice been offered a “mother of the year”
award by working-mom groups or a



mommy magazine, and I always decline.
How could they possibly know if I’m a
good mother? How can any of us know until the kid is about thirty-three and all the
personality dust has really settled? But
working moms want to validate that it’s
okay to work, especially if they work at
magazines where they can then package
that validation and sell it to stay-at-home
moms who are craving news from the outside world.
What is the rudest question you can ask a
woman? “How old are you?” “What do you
weigh?”
“When you and your twin sister are alone
with Mr. Hefner, do you have to pretend to
be lesbians?” No, the worst question is
“How do you juggle it all?”



“How do you juggle it all?” people constantly ask me, with an accusatory look in
their eyes.
“You’re fucking it all up, aren’t you?” their
eyes say. My standard answer is that I have
the same struggles as any working parent
but with the good fortune to be working at
my dream job.
The long version of the answer is more
complicated.
When my daughter was about two, I was
convinced that our babysitter was cutting
her fingernails too short. They looked red
sometimes, and she was going below the
white part; it was all wrong, in my opinion.
I know you’re thinking that the obvious
thing to do would be to point this out to the
babysitter. Hear me out.



I can tell twenty comedy writers what to
do; I can argue with a cabdriver about 10th
Avenue versus the West Side Highway; I
will happily tell a joke about Osama bin
Laden or the Ku Klux Klan on live television; but I could not talk to the babysitter
about the fingernail clipping. I’ll bet you
Margaret Thatcher would say the same
thing if she were alive today.*
Here’s the truth: I couldn’t tell the woman
who so lovingly and devotedly watches my
kid every day that I didn’t like how she did
this one thing. I didn’t want to hurt her
feelings.
And here’s the next layer of truth: As
someone who grew up middle-class with
no nannies or housekeepers of any kind, I
didn’t know how to handle it. I was not just
a first-time mother, I was a first-time
cross-cultural nanny-communicator and I



was broken. Maybe that’s what I should tell
the roving reporter from Showbiz Hollywood the next time she asks me, “Is it
weird for you being the boss of all these
people?” “Who? These actors and teamsters and camera guys? These dummies
don’t scare me.
Now, can you call my house and tell the
babysitter I’m gonna be forty minutes late?
Pweeeeze?”
But here’s the deep truth: I didn’t want to
spend MY PRECIOUS TIME AT HOME
having an awkward conversation with the
babysitter. I JUST WANT TO BE WITH
MY KID. That’s what it comes down to,
really. The best days are the ones where
you pass the babysitter* in the elevator, all
smiles, and your apartment contains no
one but your family when you walk in the



door. I think my babysitter would agree.
But I’m scared to ask her.
I would think of Midge’s little fingers in the
middle of a busy workday. I would tell myself, “Once I have the baby full-time to myself, everything will be easier.” And then it
hit me; that day was not coming. This
“work” thing was not going away. There
was no prolonged stretch of time in sight
when it would just be the baby and me.
And then I sobbed in my office for ten
minutes. The same ten minutes that
magazines urge me to use for sit-ups and
triceps dips, I used for sobbing. Of course
I’m not supposed to admit that there is triannual torrential sobbing in my office, because it’s bad for the feminist cause. It
makes it harder for women to be taken seriously in the workplace. It makes it harder
for other working moms to justify their
choice. But I have friends who stay home



with their kids and they also have a triannual sob, so I think we should call it even. I
think we should be kind to one another
about it. I think we should agree to blame
the children. Also, my crying three times a
year doesn’t distract me from my job any
more than my male coworkers get distracted watching March Madness or shooting
one another with Nerf guns, or (to stop
generalizing) spending twenty minutes on
the phone booking a doggy hotel for their
pit bull before a trip to Italy with their
same-sex partners.
After sobbing, I always fantasize about
quitting my job. “We don’t need a lot of
money!” I tell myself. “We don’t live extravagantly; we just live in an expensive city.
If we moved to a little house in the middle
of Pennsylvania we could live like kings for
much less! And we’d all be together all day
and we’ll make cupcakes and plant a



garden! And I would be taller! Yes, somehow I would be taller.” My reverie is inevitably interrupted by someone who needs
me to get back to work. There are almost
two hundred people who work on this TV
show with me. A lot of them have kids that
they miss all day just like me; they keep the
same terrible hours as I do; but unlike me,
they are not working at their dream job.
They need this job to pay their bills, and if
I flaked out and quit, their jobs would
disappear.
Also, there are many moments of my work
that are deeply satisfying and fun. And almost as many moments of full-time motherhood that stink like Axe body spray on a
brick of bleu cheese.*
So what did I do about the kid’s nails? I
hope you don’t think I let my little one
walk around with sore fingers.



I did the logical thing, or at least what
counts as logical in the fancy life I have
made for myself.
First thing in the morning while my daughter was on the potty I would cut her nails
before I left for work.
At first she didn’t want to (understandably,
since she was used to it hurting a little),
but I convinced her by cutting the nails almost all the way left to right and then letting her have the honor of pulling the clipping the rest of the way off. The process
was preposterously slow, but we were
huddled together and we told stories as we
went. This is one of the weird things about
motherhood. You can’t predict that some
of your best moments will happen around
the toilet at six A.M. while you’re holding a
pile of fingernail clippings like a Santeria
priestess.



It’s three years later now, so I’d like to believe the household communication has
gotten easier.
For example, I can whisper to my now fiveyear-old kid, “Tell Jessie not to cut your
nails so short. Bye!”
and run away. My daughter and I can have
real conversations now. I told her that I
didn’t like it that the mommy in the book
was a witch. That it hurt my feelings. And
she looked at me matter-of-factly and said,
“Mommy. I can’t read. I thought it was a
Halloween book.”
The Mother’s Prayer for Its Daughter
First, Lord: No tattoos. May neither
Chinese symbol for truth nor Winnie-thePooh holding the FSU logo stain her tender
haunches.



May she be Beautiful but not Damaged, for
it’s the Damage that draws the creepy soccer coach’s eye, not the Beauty.
When the Crystal Meth is offered,
May she remember the parents who cut
her grapes in half
And stick with Beer.
Guide her, protect her
When crossing the street, stepping onto
boats, swimming in the ocean, swimming
in pools, walking near pools, standing on
the subway platform, crossing 86th Street,
stepping off of boats, using mall restrooms,
getting on and off escalators, driving on
country roads while arguing, leaning on
large windows, walking in parking lots, riding Ferris wheels, roller-coasters, log
flumes, or anything called “Hell Drop,”



“Tower of Torture,” or “The Death Spiral
Rock ‘N Zero G Roll featuring Aerosmith,”
and standing on any kind of balcony ever,
anywhere, at any age.
Lead her away from Acting but not all the
way to Finance.
Something where she can make her own
hours but still feel intellectually fulfilled
and get outside sometimes And not have to
wear high heels.
What would that be, Lord? Architecture?
Midwifery? Golf course design? I’m asking
You, because if I knew, I’d be doing it,
Youdammit.
May she play the Drums to the fiery
rhythm of her Own Heart with the sinewy
strength of her Own Arms, so she need Not
Lie With Drummers.



Grant her a Rough Patch from twelve to
seventeen.
Let her draw horses and be interested in
Barbies for much too long, For Childhood
is short—a Tiger Flower blooming
Magenta for one day—
And Adulthood is long and Dry-Humping
in Cars will wait.
O Lord, break the Internet forever,
That she may be spared the misspelled invective of her peers And the online marketing campaign for Rape Hostel V: Girls Just
Wanna Get Stabbed.
And when she one day turns on me and
calls me a Bitch in front of Hollister, Give
me the strength, Lord, to yank her directly



into a cab in front of her friends, For I will
not have that Shit. I will not have it.
And should she choose to be a Mother one
day, be my eyes, Lord, That I may see her,
lying on a blanket on the floor at 4:50
A.M., all-at-once exhausted, bored, and in
love with the little creature whose poop is
leaking up its back.
“My mother did this for me once,” she will
realize as she cleans feces off her baby’s
neck. “My mother did this for me.” And the
delayed gratitude will wash over her as it
does each generation and she will make a
Mental Note to call me. And she will forget.
But I’ll know, because I peeped it with
Your God eyes.
Amen
What Turning Forty Means to Me



I need to take my pants off as soon as I get
home. I didn’t used to have to do that. But
now I do.
What Should I Do with My Last Five
Minutes?
So here we are near the end of the book,
and I have a question with which I need
your help.
What should I do with my last five
minutes? It feels like my last five minutes
of being famous are timing out to be simultaneous with my last five minutes of being
able to have a baby.
Science shows that fertility and movie offers drop off steeply for women after forty.
I have one top-notch baby with whom I am
in love. It’s a head-over-heels “first love”



kind of thing, because I pay for everything
and all we do is hold hands.
When she says, “I wish I had a baby sister,”
I am stricken with guilt and panic. When
she says,
“Mommy, I need Aqua Sand,” or “I only
want to eat gum!” or “Wipe my butt!” I am
less affected.
I thought that raising an only child would
be the norm in Manhattan, but my daughter is the only child in her class without a
sibling. Most kids have at least two. Large
families have become a status symbol in
New York. Four beautiful children named
after kings and pieces of fruit are a way of
saying “I can afford a four-bedroom apartment and $150,000 in elementary school
tuition fees each year. How you livin’?”



Now, I’m not really one for status symbols.
I went to public school. I have all my original teeth and face parts. When left to my
own devices, I dress like I’m here to service
your aquarium. But the kid pressure
mounts for other reasons.
The woman who runs my local toy store
that sells the kind of beautiful wooden educational toys that kids love (if there are absolutely no other toys around and they
have never seen television) asks me,
“Are you gonna have another one?”
A background actor on the set of 30 Rock
will ask, “You want more kids?” “No, no,” I
want to say. “Why would I want more kids
when I could be here with you having an
awkward conversation over a tray of old
danishes?”



The ear, nose, and throat doctor I see
about some stress-induced canker sores offers, unsolicited: “You should have another
one. I had my children at forty-one and
forty-two. It’s fine.” Did she not hear the
part about the stress-induced canker
sores?
My parents raised me that you never ask
people about their reproductive plans.
“You don’t know their situation,” my mom
would say. I considered it such an impolite
question that for years I didn’t even ask
myself. Thirty-five turned into forty faster
than McDonald’s food turns into cold
nonfood.
Behind door number two, you have the
movie business. Shouldn’t I seize the opportunity to make more movies in the next
few years? Think of the movies I could
make!



Magazine Lady—The story of an overworked woman looking for love… whose
less-attractive friend…’s mean boss is
played by me… when Bebe Neuwirth turns
it down.
The Wedding Creeper—An overworked
woman looking for love sneaks into weddings and wishes strangers well on their
wedding videos, only to fall in love with a
handsome videographer (Gerard Butler or
a coatrack with a leather jacket on it), despite the fact that when they first met, they
knocked over a wedding cake, causing an
old lady (Academy Award™ winner Jane
Fonda) to rap.
Next, a strategically chosen small part in a
respectable indie dramedysemble called
Disregarding Joy, in which I play a lesbian
therapist who unexpectedly cries during
her partner’s nephew’s bris. Roger Ebert



will praise my performance as “brave to
grow that little mustache.”
Finally, for money, I play the villain in the
live-action Moxie Girlz movie opposite a
future child star who at this moment is still
a tickly feeling in Billy Ray Cyrus’s balls.
How could I pass up those opportunities?
Do I even have the right to deprive moviegoers of those experiences?
These are the baby-versus-work life questions that keep me up at night. There’s another great movie idea! Baby Versus Work.
A hardworking baby looking for love (Kate
Hudson) falls for a handsome pile of papers (Hugh Grant). I would play the ghost
of a Victorian poetess who anachronistically tells Kate to “Go for it.”



I debate the second-baby issue when I
can’t sleep. “Should I? No. I want to. I
can’t. I must. Of course not. I should try
immediately.”
I get up to go to the bathroom and study
myself in the mirror. Do I look like
someone who should be pregnant? I look
good for forty, but I have the quaggy
jawline and hollow cheeks of a mom, not a
pregnant lady. It’s now or never. This decision cannot be delayed.
And what’s so great about work anyway?
Work won’t visit you when you’re old.
Work won’t drive you to get a mammogram and take you out after for soup. It’s
too much pressure on my one kid to expect
her to shoulder all those duties alone. Also,
what if she turns on me? I am pretty hard
to like. I need a backup.



And who will be my daughter’s family
when my husband and I are dead from
stress-induced cankers? She must have a
sibling. Hollywood be damned. I’ll just be
unemployable and labeled crazy in five
years anyway.

Let me clarify. I have observed that women, at least in comedy, are labeled “crazy”
after a certain age.
FEMALE WRITER: You ever work with
MALE AGENT: (dismissive) She’s crazy
now.



FEMALE WRITER: You know who I loved
growing up?
. What about her for
this part?
MALE WRITER: I don’t know. I hear she’s
pretty batshit.
FEMALE WRITER: I got a call today from
.
MALE PRODUCER: Ugh. We had her on
the show once. She was a crazy assache.
She wanted to see her lines ahead of time.
She had all these questions.
I’ve known older men in comedy who can
barely feed and clean themselves, and they
still work.



The women, though, they’re all “crazy.”
I have a suspicion—and hear me out, ’cause
this is a rough one—I have a suspicion that
the definition of “crazy” in show business is
a woman who keeps talking even after no
one wants to fuck her anymore.
The only person I can think of that has escaped the “crazy” moniker is Betty White,
which, obviously, is because people still
want to have sex with her.
This is the infuriating thing that dawns on
you one day: Even if you would never sleep
with or even flirt with anyone to get ahead,
you are being sexually adjudicated by these
LA creeps. Network executives really do
say things like “I don’t know. I don’t want
to fuck anybody on this show.” They really
do say that stuff. That’s not just lactationstopping dialogue on Entourage.



(To any exec who has ever said that about
me, I would hope you would at least have
the intelligence and self-awareness to
know that the feeling is extremely mutual.)
It seems to me that the fastest remedy for
this “Women Are Crazy” situation is for
more women to become producers and
hire diverse women of various ages. That is
why I feel obligated to stay in the business
and try hard to get to a place where I can
create opportunities for others, and that’s
why I can’t possibly take time off for a
second baby, unless I do, in which case
that is nobody’s business and I’ll never regret it for a moment unless it ruins my life.
And now it’s four o’clock in the morning.
To hell with everybody! Maybe I’ll just wait
until I’m fifty and give birth to a ball of
fingers!



“Merry Christmas from Tina, Jeff, Alice,
and Ball of Fingers,” the card will say.
(“Happy Holidays” on the ones I send to
my agents.)
I try to think about anything else so I can
fall back to sleep. I used to cling to the fact
that my mom had me unexpectedly at
forty, only to realize a couple years ago that
I had the math wrong and she was thirtynine. A world of difference, in my insomniac opinion.
My mom was conceived in the US, born in
Greece, and brought back here as an infant. Because of this, she never gets jury
duty.
She grew up speaking both languages, and
when I was in elementary school she volunteered to be a classroom aide because a
lot of the Greeks in our neighborhood were



“right off the boat,” as she would say, and
needed a translator. My mother knew the
language and the culture. Sometimes the
teachers would ask her to translate bad
news. “Please tell Mrs. Fondulas that her
son is very disruptive.”
And my mom would nod and say in Greek,
“George is a lovely boy.” Because she knew
if she really translated that, the kid would
get a beating and the mother would hate
her forever out of embarrassment.
Little kids’ birthdays in my neighborhood
were simple affairs. Hot dogs, Hawaiian
Punch, pin the tail on the donkey, followed
by cake and light vomiting. (Wieners,
punch, and spinning into barfing would
later be referred to as “the Paris Hilton.”)



I would always complain to my mother
after the Greek kids’ parties because they
served Italian rum cake.
Covered in slivered almonds and soaked in
booze, Italian rum cake is everything kids
hate about everything. No one even ate it.
It just got thrown away.
Cake Time is supposed to be the climax of
a birthday, but instead it was a crushing
disappointment for all. I imagine it’s like
being at a bachelor party only to find that
the stripper has overdosed in the
bathroom.
After a couple years of this nonsense my
mom explained to me that the reason the
“Greeky Greeks,” as she called them, got
the Italian rum cakes was because they
were the most expensive item in the
bakery. They wanted the adults at the party



to know they could afford it. Anyway, is
that what I’m trying to do with this secondbaby nonsense? Am I just chasing it because it’s the hardest thing for me to get
and I want to prove I can do it?
Do I want another baby? Or do I just want
to turn back time and have my daughter be
a baby again?
Some of you must be thinking, “Well, what
does your husband want? He’s a part of
this decision, too, you know!” He wants me
to stop agonizing, but neither of us knows
whether that means go for it or move on.
Why not do both, like everybody else in the
history of earth? Because, as I think we
have established in this book, things most
people do naturally are often inexplicably
difficult for me.



Secondly, the math is impossible. No matter how you add up the months, it means
derailing the TV

show where two hundred people depend
on me for their income, and I take that
stuff seriously. Like everyone from Tom
Shales to Jeff Zucker, I thought 30 Rock
would be cancelled by now.
I have a great gynecologist who is as gifted
at listening as she is at rectal exams. I went
for my annual checkup and, tired of carrying this anxiety around, burst into tears the
moment she said hello. I laid it all out for
her, and the main thing I took away from
our conversation was the kind of simple
observation that only an impartial third
party can provide. “Either way, everything
will be fine,” she smiled, and for a little



while I was pulled out of my anxious, stunted brain cloud.
One time my mom babysat a set of the
Italian Rum Cake Kids while their parents
went to a wedding reception. This was the
first time this nice couple had gone out
alone since their children were born. Their
parents dropped them off after the ceremony. Little Christo and Maria were still
all dressed up. Christo wore a tiny black
suit and a white shirt. Maria wore a red
velvet dress and cried in the playpen from
the moment her parents left until the moment they returned. My mom tried
everything to console her, food… The end.
After a couple hours of this, seven-year-old
Christo was beside himself. He had never
been babysat before. How long was this
fuckery going to go on? His sister was hysterical. He paced around our living room,



now in his shirtsleeves and black pants.
Pulling his golden curls nervously, he
looked like the night manager of a miniature diner who had just had a party of six
dine and dash. He ranted to his baby sister
in Greek, “
, vreh βρε Mapia!” This sent my mother
running into the
dining room laughing hysterically. I chased
her. What? What did he say? Roughly
translated it was “Oh!
My Maria! What is to become of us?”
His overdramatic ridiculousness tickled my
mom in such a specific way that she was
doubled over in the dining room, hoping
the kids wouldn’t see that she was laughing
so hard at them she peed a little. A phenomenon I now understand on all levels.



They were going to be fine, but they
couldn’t possibly believe it.
That must have been what I looked like to
my doctor friend. That must be what I look
like to anyone with a real problem—activeduty soldier, homeless person, Chilean
miner, etc. A little tiny person with nothing
to worry about running in circles, worried
out of her mind.
Either way, everything will be fine. But if
you have an opinion, please feel free to offer it to me through the gap in the door of a
public restroom. Everyone else does.


